2017 Wimbledon Championships – Men's singles
Roger Federer defeated Marin Čilić in the final, 6–3, 6–1, 6–4 to win the gentlemen's singles title at the 2017 Wimbledon Championships. It was his record eighth Wimbledon men's singles title (surpassing Pete Sampras and William Renshaw) and 19th major title overall. Federer also became the second man in the Open Era, after Björn Borg in 1976, to win Wimbledon without losing a set. This was Federer's 70th appearance at a major, tying the record for male players, and a record-breaking 11th men's singles final at the same major tournament. In addition, with his third-round win over Mischa Zverev, Federer won his 317th Grand Slam singles match, surpassing Serena Williams' record. With his first-round win, Federer surpassed Jimmy Connors' record for most match wins at Wimbledon. In the same match, he hit his 10,000th ace, becoming only the third man to do so. The tournament marked the fifth time that Rafael Nadal and Federer won the French Open and Wimbledon, respectively, in the same year.
Andy Murray was the defending champion and top seed but was defeated by Sam Querrey in the quarterfinals - the second consecutive year in which Querrey beat the No. 1 seed at Wimbledon, after beating Novak Djokovic in the third round the previous year. Murray nonetheless retained the ATP No. 1 singles ranking, as Rafael Nadal, Stan Wawrinka, and Novak Djokovic failed to gain enough ranking points to surpass him.
This was also the first major since the 2009 French Open in which Murray, Nadal and Djokovic all failed to reach the semifinals, and the first time since 2004 that no player reached all four quarterfinals in a year. With his win over Murray, Querrey became the first American man to reach a Grand Slam semifinal since Andy Roddick at the 2009 Wimbledon Championships; it was also his second win over a world No. 1 player, the first being against Djokovic at the 2016 Wimbledon Championships. 
For the first time since the 2005 Australian Open, David Ferrer was not seeded at a Grand Slam, and it was the first time since the 2004 US Open that Guillermo García López did not play at a Grand Slam, ending his streak of 50 consecutive Grand Slam appearances.
Wawrinka was attempting to complete the career Grand Slam but lost to Daniil Medvedev in the first round.
This was also the last Grand Slam tournament for former world No. 2 Tommy Haas.
Seeds
All seedings per modified ATP rankings.
Click on the seed number of a player to go to their draw section.
Draw
Key