2019 MotoGP World Championship
The 2019 FIM MotoGP World Championship was the premier class of the 71st F.I.M. Road Racing World Championship season.
After fifteen rounds of the championship, Marc Márquez successfully defended his Rider's Championship in Thailand taking his sixth premier class title and fourth in a row, having already won nine races. He ultimately won 12 races, breaking the single-season points and podium records with 420 points and 18 podium finishes from 19 races. Andrea Dovizioso once again finished second for Ducati for the third consecutive season with two wins, and Maverick Viñales with Yamaha sealed third with two wins. Álex Rins and Danilo Petrucci were the other race winners, both riders achieving their first-ever race wins during the season. In spite of Márquez's sizeable championship margin, seven races, namely Qatar, Italy, Austria, Britain, San Marino, Thailand and Australia were decided with last-lap passes, the season having seen plenty of close racing.
Teams and riders
All the bikes used series-specified Michelin tyres.
Team changes
Rider changes
Mid-season changes
Rule changes
The season saw the introduction of a new penalty called the "Long Lap" penalty for infractions such as exceeding track limits or engaging in reckless riding. At each circuit, a route is to be defined and marked at a safe point around the circuit (usually an asphalt run-off area outside of a turn). The penalised rider must ride through the defined area within 3 laps of being notified, thereby suffering a penalty equivalent typically to 2 or more seconds on that lap. 
Calendar
The following Grands Prix took place during the season:
Results and standings
Riders' standings
Points were awarded to the top fifteen finishers. A rider had to finish the race to earn points.
Constructors' standings
Points were awarded to the top fifteen finishers. A rider had to finish the race to earn points.
Teams' standings
The teams' standings were based on results obtained by regular and substitute riders; wild-card entries were ineligible.