Abbottabad
Abbottabad is the capital city of Abbottabad District in the Hazara region of eastern Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, Pakistan. It is the 40th largest city in Pakistan and fourth largest in the province of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa by population. It is about 120 km (75 mi) north of Islamabad-Rawalpindi and 150 km (95 mi) east of Peshawar, at an elevation of 1,256 m (4,121 ft). Kashmir lies a short distance to the east.


Abbottabad was founded in January 1853 by its namesake James Abbott, who made it the capital of Hazara. The city subsequently became an important center of the British Raj for cantonment and sanatorium. In 1901, Abbottabad became a part of the newly-established North-West Frontier Province. Following the Partition of India, it became a part of West Pakistan. In 1970, the Legal Framework Order appointed Abbottabad as the capital of the Hazara Division.
Abbottabad's diverse culture encompass various ethnicities and languages. It houses the Pakistan Military Academy.
Etymology
The name Abottabad was coined by British military officer James Abbott, in his poem titled "Abbottabad". The Persian suffix ābād translates to "abode of". Although coined by Abbott, the name Abottabad was first officially given to the town by Abbott's successor and colleague Herbert Benjamin Edwardes.
History
British period (1853–1947)

In January 1853, Abbott founded the town and made it the capital of the Hazara, then part of British India. The same year, in April 1853, Abbott was removed from his post as Deputy Commissioner of Hazara and subsequently succeeded by Edwardes, who formally gave the name Abottabad to the town. By 1907, Abbottabad gained a reputation as an important military cantonment. It consisted of four native regiments and served as the headquarters of a brigade of British Northern Army Corps. The garrison consisted of four battalions of native infantry, of the Frontier Force (including the 5th Gurkha Rifles) and two native mountain batteries.
In 1901, the population of the town and cantonment was 7,764 with an average income of Rs. 14,900. This increased to Rs. 22,300 in 1903, chiefly derived from octroi. During this time chief public institutions were built such as the Albert Victor Unaided Anglo-Vernacular High School, the Municipal Anglo-Vernacular High School and the government dispensary. In 1911, the population had risen to 11,506 and the town contained four battalions of Gurkhas.
Pakistani period (1947–present)
In August 1947, the Dominion of Pakistan came into existence.
In June 1948, the British Red Cross opened a hospital in Abbottabad to treat the thousands of injured being brought in from Kashmir.
In October 2005, Abbottabad was devastated by the Kashmir earthquake. Although most of Abbottabad survived, a number of older buildings were either destroyed or damaged.
Recent events
On 25 January 2011, Indonesian terrorist Umar Patek was arrested in Abbottabad. Patek, a member of the Jemaah Islamiyah terrorist group, was wanted in connection with a deadly series of church bombings in Indonesia in 2000, and three attacks that killed 202 people in tourist districts of Indonesia in what became known as the Bali bombings.
Osama bin Laden’s hideout
Osama bin Laden, the founder and first leader of the Islamist militant group al-Qaeda held refuge at a a compound in Abbottabad and was shot and killed there by U.S. Forces on the 2nd of May, 2011. On 2 May 2011, Abbottabad gained worldwide attention when U.S. President Barack Obama announced that Osama bin Laden had been killed in his compound in the city. In February 2012, nine months after bin Laden was killed, Pakistani authorities demolished the compound where Osama bin Laden had lived.
Topography
Abbottabad is in the Orash Valley lying between 34°92′N latitude and 73°13′E longitude at an altitude of 1,256 m (4,121 ft). To the north is the picturesque Kaghan Valley.
Climate
Abbottabad has a humid subtropical climate, with mild to warm temperatures during the spring and autumn months, hot temperatures during June and July, and cool to mild temperatures during the winter. The temperature can rise as high as 38 °C (100 °F) during the mid-summer months and drop below −5 °C (23 °F) during the extreme cold waves. Snowfall occurs occasionally in December and January, though it is sparse, while heavy rainfall occurs during the monsoon season stretching from July to September that frequently cause flooding in lower lying parts of the city.
Tourism
Abbottabad has been attracting tourists to the city since the colonial era, as it is a major transit point to all major tourist regions of Pakistan such as Nathiagali, Ayubia and Naran. According to the Imperial Gazetteer of India, "the town is picturesquely situated at the southern corner of the Rash (Orash) plain, 1,256 m (4,121 ft) above the sea".
The Karakoram Highway, which traces one of the paths of the ancient Silk Road, starts from Hasan Abdal on the N5 and heads north passing through the city, eventually reaching Khunjerab Pass. The Karakorum Highway is a major attraction itself for its views. The Karakoram, Himalayas and the Hindu Kush ranges can be approached from Abbottabad, and it continues to be a transit city for tourists, serving as a base for visiting nearby places, such as Hunza, Gilgit, Skardu and Indus Kohistan, of the Karakoram Range.
There was an influx of migrants from Azad Kashmir after the 2005 Kashmir earthquake, another from the Swat District during military operations against militants in 2009 and 2010, and from Waziristan after the army launched major operations against the Taliban in 2009. A £19M amusement park is under construction in the city on a 20-hectare (50-acre) site; it includes a zoo, adventure sports facilities, restaurants and artificial waterfalls.
Education
Abbottabad has a very healthy literacy rate approximately 56% on an average. The city has a young demographic (ages 15–30) due to the large number of students who have come from across the country to study in its schools, for example PIPS, Army Burn Hall College, Army Public College Kakul and Abbottabad Public School.
The city has a wide variety of post-secondary institutions, such as Ayub Medical College, Frontier Medical College, COMSATS University of Science and Technology, and the University of Engineering & Technology.
Abbottabad is home to the Pakistan Military Academy, a coeducational federal service military academy that provides training to the officers of the Pakistan Army. The academy has three training battalions and 12 companies. Another 2,000 guests each year, from over 34 countries, receive some training at PMA.
According to the Alif Ailaan Pakistan District Education Rankings 2014, Abbottabad is ranked 37 out of 146 districts in Pakistan in the quality of education. For facilities and infrastructure, the district is ranked 67 out of 146.

A detailed picture of the district's education performance is available online.

Media
Kay 2 TV is a local Hindko-language channel. Daily newspapers include Roznama AAJ, Roznama Shamal, Kay 2 Times, Roznama Pine, Weekly Manzar, Daily Mahasib and the Hindko newspaper Chaita.
Sports
The Abbottabad Falcons was the professional cricket team of Abbottabad who played in the national Twenty20 and List A cricket tournaments. Sports facilities in the city include:
Transportation
Abbottabad's main public transport consists of modified taxis.
Abbottabad is also served by Daewoo Express and Niazi Express, the NATCO, Skyways and other bus services.
The nearest railway station is in Havelian, which is the last and most northern station on the Pakistan Railways network. The station is approximately thirty minutes drive south from Abbottabad city centre.
Notes
References
Sources