Administrative divisions of Moldova
According to the Moldovan law on territorial administrative organisation, Moldova is divided administratively into the following administrative territorial units: districts (Romanian: raioane; see also raions), cities/towns (Romanian: orașe) and villages (Romanian: sate). The administrative territorial organization of Moldova is made on 2 levels:
along with Chișinău municipality, Bălți municipality and Tighina municipality.
Two or more villages can form together a commune (Romanian: comună).
Currently, Moldova is divided into the following first-tier  units, which include 32 districts and 3 municipalities, grouped into three regions:
two autonomous territorial units:
The final status of the latter has not been settled yet, as the region, such as defined administratively, in fact is not under the control of Moldovan authorities. The cities of Comrat and Tiraspol also have municipality status, but are not among first-tier units of Moldova; they are the seats of Gagauzia and Transnistria, respectively. Besides Chișinău, Bălți, Tighina, Comrat, and Tiraspol, on 13 April 2017 eight more became municipalities: Cahul, Ceadîr-Lunga, Edineț, Hîncești, Orhei, Soroca, Strășeni, and Ungheni.
Localities
Moldova has a total of 1,682 localities; from these 982 are incorporated (de jure with 982 mayors and 982 local councils), including 53 cities/towns, other 13 cities with municipality status (see municipiu), and 916 rural localities. They cover the entire area of the country. A number of villages are self-governed, while others 700 villages are too small to have a separate administration, and are part of either cities/towns/municipalities (41 of them) or communes (659). Few localities are inhabited.
Current divisions
In the administrative-territorial structure of Moldova are 898 first level administrative territorial units (cities/towns, sectors and villages/communes).
The status of Chișinău, Bălți, and Tighina as municipalities and first-level territorial units of the country allows their suburb villages to have, when large enough, their own mayor and local council. By contrast, the villages that are administratively part of (some of) the other cities do not retain self-rule.
¹ Tighina and the Administrative-Territorial Units of the Left Bank of the Dniester are under the control of the unrecognized separatist Pridnestrovian Moldavian Republic (PMR, also known as Transnistria). There, Tighina is known as Bender.
Notes
Areas not under central government control include:
Population
Coincidal names
There are 147 settlement names shared by multiple localities in Moldova. Most notable cases includes these:
Previous divisions
Counties (1998-2003)
Between 1998 and February 2003, Moldova was divided into 12 territorial units, including 1 municipality, 1 autonomous territorial unit, 1 territorial unit, and 9 counties (Romanian: județe; seats in brackets):
In October 1999, Taraclia County was split out from the Cahul County; it coincides with the current Taraclia District.
Cities and districts (1991-1998)
Between 1991-1998, Moldova was divided into 10 cities and 40 districts: