Amal Clooney
Amal Clooney (née Alamuddin; Arabic: أمل علم الدين; born 3 February 1978) is a Lebanese and British barrister.


Her clients include Filipino and American journalist Maria Ressa; former President of the Maldives Mohamed Nasheed; Julian Assange, the founder of WikiLeaks; former Prime Minister of Ukraine Yulia Tymoshenko; Egyptian-born Canadian journalist Mohamed Fahmy; and Iraqi activist Nadia Murad.
She co-founded the Clooney Foundation for Justice with her husband, George Clooney.
Early life and family
Amal Alamuddin Clooney was born in Beirut, Lebanon. Her first name is from أمل, ʾamal in Arabic, meaning "hope".
Her family left Lebanon when she was two years old, during the Lebanese Civil War, and settled in Gerrards Cross, Buckinghamshire.
Her father Ramzi Alamuddin, a Lebanese Druze from the Alam al-Din dynasty village of Baakline in the Chouf District, received his MBA degree at the American University of Beirut. He returned to Lebanon in 1991 after the end of the  civil war. 
Her mother, Baria (née Miknass), is half Tunisian and half Palestinian-Jordanian from a family of Sunni Muslims in Tripoli in Northern Lebanon, and was a political journalist and foreign editor of the Saudi-run newspaper al-Hayat. She is a founder of the public relations company International Communication Experts, which is part of a larger company that specialises in celebrity guest bookings, publicity photography, and event promotion.
Clooney has three siblings: one sister (Tala) and two half-brothers from her father's first marriage.
Clooney attended Dr Challoner's High School, a girls' grammar school located in Little Chalfont, Buckinghamshire, prior to university. She then studied at St Hugh's College, Oxford, where she received an exhibition grant and the Shrigley Award. She graduated with a Bachelor of Arts (BA) degree in jurisprudence in 2000. The following year she entered New York University School of Law to study for the Master of Laws (LL.M) degree. She received the Jack J. Katz Memorial Award for excellence in entertainment law. While at NYU she worked for one semester in the office of Sonia Sotomayor, then a judge for the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit and NYU Law faculty member.
Career
Clooney is qualified to practice law in the United States, and England and Wales. She was admitted to the bar in New York in 2002, and called to the Bar of England and Wales in 2010. She has also practised at international courts in The Hague, including the International Court of Justice and the International Criminal Court.
Clooney worked at Sullivan & Cromwell in New York City for three years as part of the Criminal Defense and Investigations Group, where her clients included Enron and Arthur Andersen.
She completed a judicial clerkship at the International Court of Justice in 2004, serving under Judge Vladlen S. Vereshchetin from Russia, Judge Nabil Elaraby from Egypt, and ad hoc Judge Sir Franklin Berman from the United Kingdom.
She was subsequently based in The Hague working in the Office of the Prosecutor at the UN Special Tribunal for Lebanon and at the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia, where she was Judicial assistant to Judge Patrick Robinson, Presiding Judge. The case charged the former President of former Republic of Yugoslavia with crimes allegedly committed in Kosovo, Croatia, and Bosnia during the war in the former Yugoslavia.
In 2010, Clooney was called to the Bar of England & Wales, Inner Temple. She is a practising barrister at Doughty Street Chambers. Clooney is ranked in the legal directories Legal 500 and Chambers and Partners as a leading barrister in international human rights law, public international law, and international criminal law. She is described as 'a brilliant legal mind' who 'handles cases of real international importance' and 'knows her brief inside out'. She is said to be a 'natural lead advocate' who is 'tactically first class' and 'a rare combination of intellectual depth and pragmatism'. The directories also spotlight her 'superb advocacy' and 'commanding presence before courts' and describe her as 'a dream performer before international tribunals'. They also emphasize that she is 'fantastically innovative' with an ability to galvanize 'heads of state, foreign ministers and business ... in a way that is very effective' for victims of human rights abuses. She is described as 'unafraid to raise novel points of law', 'very sophisticated in pushing the boundaries' and having a 'passionate commitment to the law and compassion for the people it serves'.
Clooney represents clients before international courts including the International Criminal Court, the International Court of Justice and the European Court of Human Rights. She represents victims of mass atrocities, including genocide and sexual violence and is representing a group of Iraqi victims from the Yazidi community seeking accountability for genocide and other crimes perpetrated by ISIS, including Nobel Peace Prize Laurette, Nadia Murad. Clooney is also representing Yazidi victims in a landmark case, alleging complicity in crimes against humanity by a French company, Lafarge for allegedly funded ISIS to keep open a plant in northern Syria that operated between 2011 and 2014. In 2021, Clooney was co-plaintiff's and victims' counsel in the first case in which an ISIS member was convicted of genocide and sentenced to life in prison.
Clooney regularly represents journalists and is currently leading the international counsel team acting for Filipino journalist and CEO of the news website Rappler, Maria Ressa. Ressa faces a series of legal charges that could lead to about 100 years in prison. Ressa was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 2021 for her 'courageous fight for freedom of expression in the Philippines'. Clooney previously represented Wa Lone and Kyaw Soe Oo, two Reuters journalists from Myanmar who were sentenced to seven years in prison by the government for reporting on crimes committed against Rohingyas by the Myanmar forces. They were released in May 2019.
Since 2015, Clooney has been a visiting faculty member and a senior fellow of Columbia Law School's Human Rights Institute, where she co-teaches the Human Rights Course with Professor Sarah H. Cleveland. Clooney has also lectured students on international criminal law at the SOAS School of Law in London, The New School in New York City, The Hague Academy of International Law, and the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
Appointments
Awards and honours
Philanthropy
Clooney is the co-founder and co-president of the Clooney Foundation for Justice, which she co-founded with her husband George Clooney in 2016.
She partnered with the Aurora Humanitarian Initiative in beginning the Amal Clooney Scholarship, which was created to send one female student from Lebanon to the United World College Dilijan each year, to enroll in a two-year International Baccalaureate (IB) programme.
Clooney and her husband sponsored a Yazidi student, Hazim Avdal, whom she met via her work with Nadia Murad as Avdal worked at Yazda. Avdal was attending the University of Chicago.
In 2018, following the Stoneman Douglas High School shooting, the Clooneys pledged $500,000 to the March for Our Lives and said they would be in attendance.
In 2022, Amal Clooney, along with Michelle Obama and Melinda French Gates, launched the 'Get Her There' campaign that seeks to catalyze educating and empowering teenage females.
Personal life
Clooney holds dual Lebanese and British citizenship. She speaks English, French and Arabic.
She became engaged to actor George Clooney on 28 April 2014. They had first met through a mutual friend in July 2013. On 7 August 2014, the couple obtained marriage licences in the Royal Borough of Kensington and Chelsea in London. They married on 27 September 2014 in Venice's city hall (at Ca' Farsetti), following a high-profile wedding ceremony two days earlier, also in Venice. They were married by Clooney's friend Walter Veltroni, former mayor of Rome. The wedding was widely reported in the media. In October 2014, it was announced that the Clooneys had bought the Mill House on an island in the River Thames at Sonning Eye in England at a cost of around £10 million.
In February 2017, it was reported by the CBS talk show The Talk that Clooney was pregnant. Friend Matt Damon confirmed the pregnancy to Entertainment Tonight. In June 2017, she gave birth to fraternal twins.
Works and publications
Books
Book chapters and journal articles
Selected articles and blogs