American Idol (season 4)
The fourth season of American Idol premiered on January 18, 2005, and continued until May 25, 2005. It was hosted by Ryan Seacrest. Randy Jackson, Paula Abdul and Simon Cowell also returned to judge. Carrie Underwood won the season with approximately 500 million votes cast in the season and 37 million for the finale.  Underwood has since gone on to become an eight-time Grammy-winning country megastar. It was also the first season of the series to be aired in high definition.


Changes
While in the past seasons celebrity guest judges have been invited to participate during the competition, this was the first season where guest judges were invited to participate in the auditions. The music celebrities featured were:
Where there were four judges present, three yeses were required for the auditioner to proceed on to Hollywood.
It is also the first season in which the age limit was raised to 28, in order to increase variety. Among those who benefited from this new rule were Constantine Maroulis, Bo Bice, Scott Savol and Nadia Turner.
Regional auditions
Auditions for Season 4 started on August 4, 2004, in Cleveland, Ohio. An audition was originally planned for Anchorage, Alaska, but that was canceled about a month before due to possible schedule conflict as a result of hurricanes affecting the Orlando auditions. Auditions were held from August to October 2004, and over 100,000 people attended the auditions for the first time.
The audition episodes featured the Molfetta twins multiple times.  They first auditioned in New Orleans but both failed, Rich Molfetta tried again in Las Vegas and got through to the Hollywood, but J.P. Molfetta failed in his audition in San Francisco.
Hollywood week
There were 193 contestants in the Hollywood rounds.  They were split into two groups to perform on separate day at the Orpheum Theatre in Los Angeles.  The contestants first chose from a list of 12 songs selected by the producers.  They were separated into groups of boys and girls but they performed solo with piano accompaniment and back-up singers.  Those who failed were eliminated after all in the group performed.  95 contestants were eliminated after this round but one, Marlea Stroman, left on her own free will and became the first contestant  ever to choose to leave the American Idol competition.  The remaining 97 contestants competed in the second round which featured group performances.  The songs for the groups were Four Tops's "I Can't Help Myself", The Temptations' Get Ready, Barry Manilow's "Jump Shout Boogie", The Marvelettes's "Please Mr. Postman" and The Supremes' "Where Did Our Love Go".  75 remained after this round.
In the last round they performed a capella.  After their performance, the contestants were divided into 4 groups in separate rooms.  Two groups were eliminated and the number of contestants was cut to 44.
Green mile
After further deliberation by the judges, 24 semi-finalists, 12 women and 12 men, were then selected.  At Pasadena Civic Center, each contestant took the elevator from their holding room to the floor above, and in a walk that would later be dubbed the "green mile", to see the judges who would then reveal their fate to them.
Semi-finals
Because of the highly unbalanced finals in season 3 where female contestants formed the clear majority (8 to 4) of the final 12, rules for the semifinals were changed so as to give an equal number of male and female finalists. From this season to season seven, and again for season nine, 12 men and 12 women competed separately on consecutive nights, with 2 of each gender being voted off each week in the result shows until 12 finalists were left, 6 men and 6 women.
Color key:
Top 24
Top 20
Top 16
Finalists
Finals
In this season, guest judges were introduced in some episodes, and sometimes the mentor joined as judges.
In the result shows, the bottom two vote-getters reprised their performances before the elimination was announced, or only the eliminated one performed after the result is revealed.
Color key:
Top 11 – Billboard Number Ones
Top 7 – 1970s Dance Music
Top 3 –  Clive's Choice, Idols' Choice, Judges' Choice
Each contestant sang three songs.
Judge Simon Cowell believed that Bice would have won the season, were he able to save his a cappella rendering of "In a Dream" for his final performance.
Finale – Simon Fuller's choice, Contestant's choice & Winner's single
Each contestant sang three songs.
The fourth-season finale featuring Bo Bice and Carrie Underwood aired May May 24, 25. It featured appearances by former auditioners, and celebrity cameos by Kenny G, Rascal Flatts, David Hasselhoff, Kenny Wayne Shepherd, George Benson, Billy Preston, Babyface and Lynyrd Skynyrd. The winner of the competition was Carrie Underwood, who would eventually become the second "Idol" winner to sweep all three major music awards (American Music, Billboard, and Grammy Award) in a single season (for 2006–07).
In a nod to the "Diana knew she'd been eliminated by the performance order" controversy of Idol 3, neither contestant sang the winner's single, "Inside Your Heaven", before the results were announced.
Underwood's first single, "Inside Your Heaven", debuted at number one on the Billboard Hot 100 on June 14, 2005, and had first-week sales of 170,000 copies. One week later, runner-up Bo Bice released his version of the song, which debuted at number two.
Elimination chart
Color key:
DialIdol
The computer program DialIdol, which allows voters to autodial their votes and uses the dialing results to make predictions about the eliminations, was in development during season 4. It was finished by Top 6 week and was used to predict the voting results from the Top 6 to Top 2. However, the dialing program was not made available to the general public until season 5.
Controversy
During the season, Corey Clark, a season two contestant who was disqualified for having an undisclosed arrest record, alleged in an interview on ABC's Primetime Live that he had an affair with Paula Abdul while on the show. The finale show included a parody segment spoofing the alleged scandal.
Votefortheworst.com, which campaigned voting for Scott Savol, made headlines when Savol outlasted Constantine Maroulis and made it into the final five.
On the Top 11, the show had a voting error in which three of the contestants had their numbers mixed up. The Wednesday show which was supposed to be the elimination night made fans revote again as the numbers were fixed and Thursday was the elimination night.
Bo Bice was revealed to have been arrested on a felony cocaine possession charge in June 2001 at a strip club in Madison County, Ala., and was also arrested two years later for marijuana possession, public intoxication, and possession of drug paraphernalia.
Scott Savol was also revealed to have been convicted of a misdemeanor charge of disorderly conduct for domestic violence. However, no action was taken against either of them by the show producers because they had revealed their misdemeanors in advance.
U.S. Nielsen ratings
Season 4 of American Idol had an overall average viewership of 26.8 million and was the top show for the 2004–2005 TV season. Its Tuesday episodes averaged 27.32 million (ranked first) while the Wednesday episodes averaged 26.07 million  (ranked third). It also drove Fox, for the first time ever, to become the top network in the 18-to-49 demographic for the season.
Note 1: The Top 11 Wednesday night was a repeat performance night due to a mix-up in the phone numbers for the contestants.  The result show was moved to Thursday.
Music releases
The compilation album for this season was performed by the top twelve finalists.
Source: Idolsmusic.com