Aries (astrology)
Aries (♈︎) (Greek: Κριός Kriós, Latin for "ram") is the first astrological sign in the zodiac, spanning the first 30 degrees of celestial longitude (0°≤ λ <30°), and originates from the Aries constellation. Under the tropical zodiac, the Sun transits this sign from approximately March 21 to April 19 each year. This time duration is exactly the first month of the Solar Hijri calendar (Arabic Hamal/Persian Farvardin/Pashto Wray).
According to the tropical system of astrology, the Sun enters the sign of Aries when it reaches the March equinox, typically on March 21. Because the Earth takes approximately 365.24 days to go around the Sun, the precise time of the equinox is not the same each year, and generally will occur about six hours later from one year to the next until reset by a leap year. The leap day February 29 causes that year's March equinox to fall about eighteen hours earlier compared with the previous year.
Background
Aries is the first fire sign in the zodiac, the other fire signs being Leo and Sagittarius. Individuals born while the Sun is in this sign may be called Ariens The color for Aries is red. In astrology, Aries is the cardinal sign of the fire trigon. It is one of the six positive signs.
The equivalent in the Hindu solar calendar is Meṣa.
Mythology
In Greek Mythology, the symbol of the ram is based on the Chrysomallus, the flying ram that rescued Phrixus and Helle, the children of the Boeotian king Athamas and provided the Golden Fleece. Aries is derived from the God of War, Ares. He is described as, "murderous, bloodthirsty, the incarnate curse of mortals; and, strangely, a coward". The Roman name for Ares was Mars, which is the ruling planet of the sign.
Characteristics
According to astrologers, the gender of Aries is masculine. The element is fire. The modality is cardinal. The ruling planet is Mars, which also rules Scorpio. Masculine, or positive, zodiac signs are said to take initiative in pursuing their ambitions with aggressive tendencies. Fire signs possess leadership skills and are uninhibited in their approach to life, which can manifest positively with spontaneity or negatively with impulsivity. They project a strong persona but are more sensitive than they may appear. Cardinal signs have a forceful nature and act decisively. They also prefer to do things in accordance with their own ideas and may be viewed as 'bossy'. Mars being the ruling planet makes Aries a sign that is determined to get what they want, and the planet's influence gives Aries a short temper. Aries, being the first sign of the zodiac, tend towards a child-like spirit or immaturity.