Asociación Mexicana de Productores de Fonogramas y Videogramas
Asociación Mexicana de Productores de Fonogramas y Videogramas (AMPROFON) (English: Mexican Association of Producers of Phonograms and Videograms, A.C.) is a non-profit organization integrated by multinational and national record companies in Mexico. Established on April 3, 1963, it is a trade association of phonographic companies that represent more than 70 percent of the market in Mexico. AMPROFON is an associated member of the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry (IFPI).
History
The organisation was founded under the name Phonographic Discs Producers (AMPRODISC) in Mexico on April 3. 1963. The aim was to create a civil association to represent the rights and interests of the producers of phonographic recordings. The members were:
On July 26, 1971, the name was changed to Mexican Phonogram Producers Association (Asociación Mexicana de Productores de Fonogramas) and, as a result of the new medium of music videos, on May 3, 1990, the name was changed to Mexican Association of Producers of Phonograms and Videograms (AMPROFON), its current name.
Sales certificates
The AMPROFON awards certificates for music releases in Mexico. The level of the award varies depending on the format of the release and the quantity shipped. Certificates are usually awarded on the basis of the number of units the release has shipped, rather than the number it has sold.
The certification award order for Mexico differs from many other certification providers. Most countries award at most one gold album, after which subsequent awards will be platinum, multiplying each time the platinum threshold is again passed (i.e., gold – platinum – 2×platinum – 3×platinum, etc.). However, AMPROFON will add incremental awards for platinum or gold to a recording which has already achieved platinum status (i.e., gold – platinum – platinum+gold – 2×platinum – 2×platinum+gold, etc.), each time a sales threshold is crossed.
Music charts
Charts are updated every Wednesday evening covering national sales in four different album charts:
AMPROFON does not produce charts for physical sales of single releases, although it does certify shipped quantities for them until June 30, 2009. As of 2017, it publishes a weekly streaming singles chart.
See also
Notes