Austin & Ally
Austin & Ally is an American comedy television series created by Kevin Kopelow and Heath Seifert that aired on Disney Channel from December 2, 2011 to January 10, 2016. The series stars Ross Lynch, Laura Marano, Raini Rodriguez, and Calum Worthy.
Set in Miami, Florida, the series focuses on the relationship between two very different musicians: extroverted and fun-loving singer and instrumentalist Austin Moon and introverted and awkward songwriter Ally Dawson, who is also a singer, but has a bad case of stage fright.
Plot
In the initial episode, "Rockers & Writers", Austin overhears Ally singing a song she's written.  Later, he changes the tempo of the song and sings it himself, although he's completely forgotten it's the same song he heard Ally singing.  He becomes famous from it after his best friend, Dez, directs Austin in a music video for the song and posts it on the Internet, making Austin an overnight sensation. Once Ally takes credit for her song, she and Austin work together on a second song.  At the end of the episode, Austin convinces her to become his partner, and the two agree to work together and eventually become close friends. Ally's best friend, Trish, pitches in as Austin's manager and Dez continues to direct Austin's music videos. At the end of the first season, Austin gets signed to Jimmy Starr's record label.
The second season sees both Austin and Ally taking bigger steps. Ally conquers her stage fright by performing a duet with Austin. By the end of the second season, Ally signs a record deal and records an album with Ronnie Ramone, while Austin goes on his first national tour. Due to her schedule with Ronnie Ramone, Ally is unable to attend the first half of Austin's tour, but in the first two episodes of the third season, Ally does attend the second half of the tour.
In the third season, Ally's career takes off. Later, Ally is making her first album. By the end of the third season, Austin sacrifices his music career when his record label forbids him from being together with Ally. Austin chooses to be with Ally as they confess their love for each other. In the end, Austin goes with Ally on her first tour, Trish starts her own management company, and Dez goes to film school in Los Angeles.
In the fourth season, the group reunites after the tour and turns Sonic Boom into a music school called A&A Music Factory, where they help students pursue their musical dreams. They combine their talents to become business partners, and the store's success explodes.
The series has been described as a "pint-sized" version of HBO's comedy-drama Entourage.
Episodes
Jessie crossover
In November 2012, Disney Channel announced that the series would crossover with Jessie as an hour-long special episode titled "Austin & Jessie & Ally All Star New Year". The special aired on December 7, 2012, in which Austin finally gets to perform in Times Square on New Year's Eve like he has always dreamed of, with help from Jessie and the Ross children. Later, Jessie and the children travel to Miami with the group. Jessie inadvertently steals lyrics that were written by Zuri and tries to get Austin to sing them with her. Meanwhile, Ravi is jealous to see that the family's pet lizard, Mrs. Kipling, may have a crush on Dez, though it turns out that Mrs. Kipling does not like Dez at all.
Cast and characters
Main
Recurring
Production
The series was created by Kevin Kopelow and Heath Seifert, the writers and producers of the Nickelodeon comedy series All That and the Disney Channel sitcoms Sonny with a Chance and Jonas. Production for the pilot episode began in mid-February 2011, and on May 24, 2011, Disney Channel announced that Austin & Ally had been picked up as a series. They initially ordered 13 episodes, though that number was later increased to 21; however, only 19 aired. The first promo for the series was released in October 2011, during Disney Channel's Make Your Mark: The Ultimate Dance-Off event. The series officially premiered on December 2, 2011. The series was renewed for a second season and resumed production in summer 2012. The second season premiered on October 7, 2012. The series was renewed for a third season by Disney Channel on April 2, 2013. The third season premiered on October 27, 2013, and production ended on January 24, 2014. The series was renewed for a fourth season on April 25, 2014, which premiered on January 18, 2015. On February 6, 2015, Laura Marano stated that the fourth season would be the final season. The final episode aired on January 10, 2016.
Broadcast
The series airs worldwide on Disney Channel. It aired as a preview in Canada alongside the original broadcast and premiered on January 20, 2012. It premiered in Singapore on March 3, 2012, and in Australia and New Zealand on March 23, 2012. In India, the series premiered on Disney Channel on December 1, 2013, and on October 30, 2017 on Disney International HD. In the UK and Ireland the series aired a preview on March 30, 2012, and premiered on April 20, 2012. The series premiered on Disney Channel in Canada on September 1, 2015, with Raini Rodriguez and Calum Worthy introducing the series with special contests and events.
Notes