Babcock & Wilcox
Babcock & Wilcox is an American renewable, environmental and thermal energy technologies and service provider that is active and has operations in many international markets across the globe with its headquarters in Akron, Ohio, USA. Historically, the company is best known for their steam boilers.
Background
The company was founded in 1867 in Providence, Rhode Island, by partners Stephen Wilcox and George Babcock to manufacture and market Wilcox's patented water-tube boiler. B&W's list of innovations and firsts include the world's first installed utility boiler (1881); manufacture of boilers to power New York City's first subway (1902); first pulverized coal power plant (1918); design and manufacture of components for USS Nautilus, the world's first nuclear-powered submarine (1953–55); the first supercritical pressure coal-fired boiler (1957); design and supply of reactors for the first U.S. built nuclear-powered surface ship, NS Savannah (1961).
The company provided design, engineering, manufacturing, construction and facilities management services to nuclear, renewable, fossil power, industrial and government customers worldwide. B&W's boilers supply more than 300,000 megawatts of installed capacity in over 90 countries around the world. During World War II, over half of the US Navy fleet was powered by Babcock & Wilcox boilers.
Babcock & Wilcox
Babcock & Wilcox (B&W) is headquartered in Akron, Ohio, USA, and provides energy and environmental technologies and services for power and industrial markets worldwide. Its three brand segments are named B&W Renewable, B&W Environmental and B&W Thermal.  B&W and its subsidiaries have operations throughout North America, Europe, the Middle East, Asia and Latin America, in addition to global technology licensees and strategic partnerships.
B&W Renewable: Technologies for renewable power and heat generation, including waste-to-energy, biomass energy and black liquor systems for the pulp and paper industry. Technologies support a circular economy, diverting waste from landfills to use for power generation and replacing fossil fuels, while recovering metals and reducing emissions.
B&W Environmental:  Emissions control and environmental technology solutions for utility, waste to energy, biomass, carbon black, and industrial steam generation applications. Includes systems for cooling, ash handling, particulate control, nitrogen oxides and sulfur dioxides removal, chemical looping for carbon control, and mercury control.
B&W Thermal: Steam generation equipment, aftermarket parts, construction, maintenance and field services for plants in the power generation, oil and gas, and industrial sectors. Services global base of installed equipment for utilities and general industrial applications including refining, petrochemical, food processing, metals and others.
History

The company was founded in 1867 by Stephen Wilcox and his partner George Herman Babcock with the intention of building safer steam boilers. Stephen Wilcox first avowed that “there must be a better way” to safely generate power, and he and George Babcock responded with the design for the first inherently safe water-tube boiler. B&W was the main builder of naval boilers for American forces during World War II, and were a supplier to the Manhattan Project. After the war they entered the nuclear reactor business, and became a major supplier for commercial nuclear power plants. They also built naval nuclear reactors, including for the first commercial nuclear ship. In 2000 the company filed for bankruptcy due to lawsuits from employees over asbestos exposure; they emerged from bankruptcy in 2006.
Football
The company had works association football teams which played at senior level in Scotland and the United States; Babcock & Wilcox F.C. reached the second round of the Scottish Cup on two occasions, and the American side was runner-up once in the American Cup.