BabyFirst
BabyFirst (stylized in all lowercase since 2019) is an American Christian pay television channel producing and distributing content for babies from 0–3 years and their parents through television, the internet, and mobile applications. The channel is owned by First Media US. The content is intended to develop an infant's skills, such as color recognition, counting and vocabulary.


The network is based in Los Angeles, California and is available in over 120 million homes in 33 countries and in 13 languages.
History
Origins
BabyFirst was announced in 2004 by Guy Oranim and Sharon Rechter. The network was launched on May 11, 2006, on DirecTV and made available through EchoStar's Dish Network in June 2006. It is based in Los Angeles and was initially funded by Regency Enterprises, Kardan and Bellco Capital. The channel was controversial as the first 24-hour channel for children six months to three years in age, but it was popular among parents and grew quickly.
Distribution expansion
In the 2000s, the Federal Trade Commission responded to a complaint by the Campaign for a Commercial Free Childhood alleging that BabyFirst's advertising that it helped babies develop skills was misleading. The FTC did not impose any sanctions.
By 2008, it was broadcasting in ten territories in the Asia Pacific, such as China and Korea. In October 2008, SingTel started distributing  the channel  to the Singapore audience. It was also being broadcast in Africa and Latin America. In May 2008, it signed a distribution agreement with Time Warner Cable. In 2009, HBO Asia became the exclusive distributor  in Asia.
In 2011, the network obtained agreements to distribute the channel in the United Kingdom through the BSkyB satellite network as well as in Mexico through Sky Mexico and Cablevision. A French version was introduced with CanalSat in 2011. In late 2011, it had arranged broadcasting agreements throughout Europe, the Middle East, and Canada.
A bilingual Latin and English channel, BabyFirst Americas, was launched with Comcast in 2012. A premium  YouTube channel was introduced in June 2013.
Recent history
In 2013, former ABC Network President Steven McPherson and Rich Frank, the former chairman of Disney Channel became investors and board members as the company worked to develop new content and improve advertising revenues. In May 2014, BabyFirst and AT&T U-verse released a co-developed second-screen app for mobile devices for children to interact with the television programming through tablets or smartphones.
Programming
The television channel provides 24-hour programming for babies. About 90 percent of the 90 shows it produces are original content created at its studios. Acquired programs include Mio Mao,  Squeak!, Tec the Tractor, and Suzy's Zoo. The format of the network limits each of the network's presentations to three to five minutes of length that are either live-action or animated.
The New York Times described the content as "decidedly unhurried," making extensive use of bright colors and upbeat music. Programming development is said to be  guided by child psychology experts and is designed to encourage a child's skills development, such as counting, vocabulary and color recognition. The   channel  logo in the corner changes colors to indicate the skills a segment is intended to develop. Late-night programming is intended to lull viewers to sleep.
There are also 41 BabyFirst apps for mobile devices. An app available to AT&T U-verse viewers allows children to draw on a mobile device and have the drawing appear on the television screen.
Some experts argue that exposing children to television at such an early age is taking technology too far or that parents are using  the channel as a digital babysitter. Parents, in turn, refute that argument, claiming that experts have lost touch with the realities of raising a child. The firm suggests the programming is intended to be watched by parents and their children together in an interactive way.