Belladonna (actress)
Belladonna (born Michelle Anne Sinclair; May 21, 1981) is an American actress, director, producer, model, and pornographic and erotic actress. She retired from the sex industry in 2008. Since retiring from pornography, she has acted in several films, including Inherent Vice and The Ladies of the House.


Personal life
Michelle Anne Sinclair was born in Biloxi, Mississippi, the second of eight children. She grew up in a traditional conservative Mormon family. Her father, a retired Air Force officer, was a Mormon bishop. The family has German, Scottish, and Cherokee Indian roots.Sinclair dropped out of high school and moved out of her parents' house at 15. Prior to her professional career, she held jobs at 7-11, Victoria's Secret, Sears and Subway.
She married Aiden Kelly in 2004, with whom she has a daughter.
Career
She was introduced to the adult industry when an agent came to Utah to see one of her friends, who introduced him to her. The next day she flew to Los Angeles with the intention of joining the industry. Immediately prior to starting her porn career she was dancing in a club in Utah. The pseudonym "Belladonna" came in part from a friend in Utah named Bella; later, an early agent suggested Bella Donna as it means "beautiful woman" in Italian. Her motivation to join the adult industry was mainly financial.
Her career began in 2000 when she was 18. Her first film was Real Sex Magazine. One of her early films featured Sinclair in a rough group sex scene with twelve men, staged in a prison. She has since appeared in over 300 adult films, including titles such as Service Animals 6 & 7, She-Male Domination Nation, Bella Loves Jenna, Back 2 Evil, Weapons of Ass Destruction, and Fashionistas Safado: The Challenge. In 2002 she featured in the multi award-winning BDSM themed Fashionistas; its director John Stagliano described her as "a woman with the most incredible sexual abilities I’ve ever seen." As well as Stagliano she has often been directed by Nacho Vidal, Jules Jordan and Rocco Siffredi. In 2003 she signed a contract with Sineplex, for whom she also directed.
Appearances
She has appeared several times in the reality television series Family Business, which focuses on the life of porn director Adam Glasser a.k.a. "Seymore Butts". In 2004 she was one of a number of porn stars photographed by Timothy Greenfield-Sanders for a "coffee table book" on the adult industry, XXX: 30 Porn-Star Portraits; she also appears in the HBO documentary Thinking XXX about the making of the book.
In a 2007 interview with the Salt Lake City Weekly, Sinclair expressed some regret about aspects of her career in pornography, particularly her early notoriety for performing acts and scenes that many other performers regarded as extreme or taboo. Lamenting the lack of guidance from more experienced actresses, Sinclair described an extended period of clinical depression. Sinclair stressed in this same interview, however, that she took responsibility for all her decisions and that she was never forced to perform.
In 2011, she was named by CNBC as one of the 12 most popular stars in porn. CNBC noted that while she had stepped back from acting to pursue directing and producing, she has maintained a loyal fan base, and has been nominated for 42 AVN awards and won 10 in the course of her career.
Primetime special
Her career in the pornography business was followed for two years by a crew from ABC Television, culminating in a January 2003 interview with Diane Sawyer as part of a Primetime Thursday segment on pornography. At one point in the interview Belladonna broke down in tears, when Sawyer asked her, "You keep describing these awful things that happened to you. Yet, you keep smiling. Why?" Belladonna's smile wavered and her eyes watered up. "It's so I don't start crying," she said.
The publicity provided by the interview boosted Belladonna's career. The interview has since been used by a number of anti-pornography groups to support their case that pornography is exploitative of the women who appear in it; nevertheless, Sinclair remained an active performer in the industry. In later interviews, Sinclair claimed that she had never intended to make "anti-porn" statements. In one interview, when she was asked if she were happy with how the interview came out, her reply was, "I am not happy about Primetime but I would love to see the whole story air one day so everyone can see how much I had to say that was FOR the porn industry. If you know me you know that I loved shooting!" ABC contacted her once to do a follow-up to the interview; she refused saying, "No thank you. I don't want to be embarrassed again." Several figures in the porn industry objected to her comments on the program. In an interview with Vice, Sinclair admitted that despite being depressed at the time, the interview was embarrassing and that when she watched it, there were elements in the piece that were untrue.
Retirement from pornography, acting career and subsequent endeavors
In August 2007, Sinclair decided to semi-retire from performing with other people over concerns of STDs, specifically herpes. She thought she had contracted herpes in 2002 and was worried the disease had spread; however, it was later discovered that it was a skin rash rather than herpes. Regardless, she still decided to semi-retire.
In 2008, she came out of retirement, and filmed a number of hardcore scenes. She appeared in Digital Playground's Pirates II, the sequel to their top-selling DVD, Pirates. She has also appeared recurringly in James Gunn's PG Porn. Her last adult film was Odd Jobs 4 in 2008.
Belladonna was featured on the cover of the second album of British metalcore band Asking Alexandria, titled Reckless & Relentless, released in 2011. She also later featured in their short film Through Sin + Self Destruction.
In July 2012, she announced via Twitter that she was "no longer interested in having sex on camera" and would be pursuing her other interests. In 2014, she made her non-pornographic feature film debut in John Wildman's The Ladies of the House, a horror film about a group of female cannibals. She appeared in Paul Thomas Anderson's film Inherent Vice as Clancy Charlock in 2014 and in a short film titled Dream Murder Machine in 2018. She also considered becoming a sex positive speaker and instructor.
Awards
AVN Awards
The AVN Awards are sponsored and presented by the American adult video industry trade magazine AVN (Adult Video News). Belladona has been nominated for 43 AVN Awards, of which she has won 10. In 2011, she was inducted into the AVN Hall of Fame.
XRCO Awards
The XRCO Awards are given by the X-Rated Critics Organization annually to people working in adult entertainment.
F.A.M.E. Awards
The Fans of Adult Media and Entertainment Awards (F.A.M.E.) were created in 2006 by Genesis magazine, WantedList.com and Adult Video News magazine, and Adam & Eve as a means for the public to vote for their favorites.
Ninfa Prize
Ninfa Prizes are awarded at the annual Spanish pornographic film festival, the Festival Internacional de Cine Erótico de Barcelona.