Board of Control for Cricket in India
The Board of Control for Cricket in India (BCCI) is the national governing body for cricket in India. Its headquarters are situated at Cricket centre, Wankhede Stadium in Mumbai. The BCCI is the richest governing body of cricket in the world and is part of the Big Three of international cricket, along with Cricket Australia and the England and Wales Cricket Board.


The board was formed in December 1928 and is a consortium of state cricket associations. The state associations select their own representatives who in turn elect the BCCI president. Grant Govan was the first BCCI president and Anthony De Mello was its first secretary. It joined the Imperial Cricket Conference in the year 1926. The BCCI is an autonomous, private organisation and does not fall under the purview of the National Sports Federation of India. The government of India has minimal regulation on BCCI. As such, it does not receive any grants or funds from the Ministry of Sports.
BCCI manages four squads that represent India in international cricket: the men's national cricket team, the women's national cricket team, the national under-19 cricket team  and the women's national under-19 cricket team. It also governs the developmental India A and India B teams. As part of its duties, the BCCI organizes and schedules matches to be played by each of these teams, and it schedules, sanctions and organises every season of domestic cricket in India.
BCCI has hosted multiple ICC World Cups in past. It will host upcoming 2023 Cricket World Cup, 2026 ICC T20 World cup, 2031 ICC ODI Cricket World Cup, and 2025 Women's Cricket World Cup.
History
India has a rich sporting history. BCCI has hosted and organised multiple ICC cricket World Cups, such as the 1987, 1996, 2011, 2016, 2021 ICC Men's cricket World cups, 2013, 2016 Women's Cricket world cups.
Early years
The first game of cricket was played in India by European sailors. They played it as a recreational activity in the early half of the 18th century. These sailors played Cricket near their settlement in coastal areas. The first recorded match in India was played between the British army and British settlers, in 1751. The world's second oldest cricket club, the Calcutta Cricket Club, was founded in 1792 in Calcutta (present Kolkata). The Parsis were the first civilian community who took cricket as a sport and played it in India. In 1848 they set up the Oriental Cricket Club in Bombay (present Mumbai). In 1850, they founded the Young Zoroastrian Cricket Club. In 1886, Hindu people founded Hindu Gymkhana sports club.
In 1912, an all-India cricket team visited England for the first time, sponsored and captained by the Maharaja of Patiala. In 1926, two representatives of the Calcutta Cricket Club travelled to London to attend meetings of the Imperial Cricket Conference, the predecessor to the current International Cricket Council. Although technically not an official representative of Indian cricket, they were allowed to attend by Lord Harris, chairman of the conference. The outcome of the meeting was the MCC's decision to send a team to India, led by Arthur Gilligan, who had captained England in The Ashes.
In a meeting with the Maharaja of Patiala and others, Gilligan promised to press for its inclusion in the ICC if all the promoters of the game in the country came together to establish a single controlling body. An assurance was given, and a meeting was held in Delhi on 21 November 1927.  This meeting was attended by delegates from Patiala, Delhi, United Provinces, Rajputana, Alwar, Bhopal, Gwalior, Baroda, Kathiawar, Central Provinces, Sindh and Punjab. A consensus was reached to create a board for control of cricket in India.  On 10 December 1927, a unanimous decision to form a provisional board of control was taken. In December 1928, the BCCI was formed. R E Grant Govan was elected as its first president and Anthony de Mello as secretary.
In the year 1926, BCCI joined the Imperial Cricket Council, the governing body for international cricket. In 1936 BCCI started India's premier first-class cricket championship, the Ranji Trophy. It was named after the first Indian person who played international cricket, the King of Nawanagar state, K.S. Ranjitsinhji. He played for England in international cricket. The Mumbai cricket team (Bombay Cricket team until the 1990s) is the most successful team, winning 41 titles.
In 1932, India played its maiden Test match, under the captaincy of CK Naidu, against England at the Lord's cricket ground in London. During England's 1933-34 tour of India, on 17 December 1933, Lala Amarnath became the first Indian batsman to score a test century, scoring 118 on his debut, at the Bombay Gymkhana. In 1967–68, India won its first ever Test cricket series outside Asia. Previously it had defeated Pakistan, New Zealand and England and won series at home in India.
1945–1960
In 1952, the English team did a tour of India.  It was the English team's first tour of India after India was freed from British control.  Nigel Howard was the captain of touring team. The former India captain, Vijaya Ananda Gajapathi Raju, also known as Vizzy, was the BCCI president in the 1960s.
1960–1970
In 1975, the BCCI paid 2500 rupees per match to the test cricketers. Banks, Indian railways and private enterprises would recruit players.
1970–1985
The board made Ajit Wadekar captain. In 1971, The Indian team won their first test series against England on English soil in the 71 tour and the against the West Indies in the Caribbean 1970–71 West Indies tour. Sunil Gavaskar made his test debut.
World Cup 1983 victory 
India won the 1983 Cricket World Cup, defeating the defending champions, the West Indies by 43 runs in the final at the Lord's. India also won the World Championship of Cricket in 1985, defeating Pakistan by 8 wickets in the final at the Melbourne Cricket Ground. The BCCI hosted the 1987 World cup. It would be the first time that the cricket world cup was organized outside England.
1985–2000
Through the 1980s and early 1990s, BCCI paid ₹5 lakh per match to terrestrial network Doordarshan to telecast Indian cricket team's matches.
In 1991, BCCI proposed South Africa's readmission to international cricket at the International Cricket Council (ICC). After the proposal succeeded, BCCI sold television broadcast rights for the first time, with South African Broadcasting Corporation purchasing the rights to telecast the South African cricket tour of India, South Africa's first official international tour after a 21-year exile from international cricket. During this time, South Africa would join the "Asian bloc" of BCCI and its South Asian neighbours.
In 1993, BCCI signed a deal with TransWorld International (TWI), wherein TWI would pay BCCI for telecasting England's tour of India on satellite television and Doordarshan would pay TWI for the rights to telecast the matches in India. The 1993 Hero Cup was telecast on Star TV which made it the first cricket series to be telecast on satellite television in India and broke the monopoly of Doordarshan. This ensued a lengthy legal battle between Doordarshan and BCCI, which was led by Jagmohan Dalmiya and president I. S. Bindra. In February 1995, the Supreme Court of India ruled that the television rights of India's matches were a "commodity" belonging to the BCCI for which the broadcaster must pay BCCI and not the other way around.
BCCI, in a joint bid with Pakistan and Sri Lanka, won the rights to host the 1996 Cricket World Cup, defeating the England and Australia bloc. The tournament was a commercial success, yielding ICC a profit of $50 million.
In 1997, Dalmiya went on to become the president of ICC. With Dalmiya at the helm of ICC, BCCI led a successful proposal of granting Test status to Bangladesh in 1999–2000.
2000–2021
In 2007, BCCI established the Indian Premier League (IPL), an annual franchise-based Twenty20 cricket league. In 2008, BCCI sold the ownership of eight city-based franchises to various corporate groups and Bollywood celebrities in a closed auction for a total of US$723.49 million and the tournament's global media rights for 10 years to World Sport Group for US$1.03 billion. The media deal was renegotiated the following year to $1.6 billion. In 2010, BCCI expanded the league to 10 teams, selling two new franchises for a total of US$703 million. On the back of the commercial success of IPL, similar-styled Twenty20 leagues spawned around the world as well as franchise-based leagues in other sports in India.
Since 2022
On 14 February 2022, BCCI led foundation for new National Cricket Academy (NCA) at Bengaluru.
Women's cricket
In 2007 the governing body of women's cricket, Women's Cricket Association of India, merged into the BCCI. This happened after the International Women's Cricket Council merged into ICC in 2006.
India women's national cricket team represents India in Women's international cricket. Indian women's team played first cricket world cup, the 1978 Women's Cricket World Cup, the first women's cricket world cup to be held in India. Diana Edulji was the first captain of India women's cricket team in ODI. Notable achievements of the women's team have been appearances in the finals of the 2005 Women's Cricket World Cup in South Africa and 2017 Women's Cricket World Cup in England.
The 1978 Women's Cricket World Cup, 1997 Women's Cricket World Cup and 2013 Women's Cricket World Cup, have been held in India.
On 28 October 2022, secretary of BCCI Jay Shah announced that the BCCI will pay equal amount of money to women's team players as they do pay to men's team's players. BCCI pays men rupee 15 lakh for Test match, 6 lakh for ODI and 3 lakh for T20I per match.
Indian Premier League
In 2008 BCCI launched its franchise Twenty20 cricket league, the IPL, which has grown to become the world's most lucrative and richest cricket league, attracting many of the worlds' top players. It is one of the biggest sports league in the world. The IPL is the major revenue source for the BCCI, and is the only league to have a special window in ICC Future Tours Programme (ICC FTP), meaning that very little international cricket is organised during the tournament.
From 2008, it banned Pakistani players to play in IPL due to Pakistan's involvement in 2008 Mumbai terrorist attacks. In that terrorist attack by Pakistan-trained terrorists, 166 people died and 238 was injured. The terrorists was of Lashkar-e-Taiba, a Pakistan-based UN, Israel, USA and India designated banned terrorist organisation. The attack widespread angard Indians. In 2012 BCCI advised its IPL franchises to not buy any Pakistani players. It was wary of several issues, their off-field misdemeanours, spot-fixing alligations against them.
From 2012, BCCI opposed to hold bilateral series with PCB. India plays against Pakistan only in ICC, ACC's multinational events. Many times PCB urged to BCCI to play bilaterals but BCCI rejected them all the time. As per BCCI they can not and will not play bilateral series against Pakistan without Government of India's (GOI) permission. Pakistan  sponsors, harbours, support terrorist organisations and trains terrorists, is the main reason for strong opposition form GOI. In 2017, then Sports minister of India, Vijay Goel said on this matter that, “Terrorism and sports can't go along and Pakistan should understand that. The relation between India and Pakistan can be cordial only after Pakistan stops sponsoring cross border terrorism."
BCCI pays 10 percent from the salary of every foreign players to their respective national board. In 2022, Australian Cricketers' Association expressed their unhappiness on it.
Allegations, controversies and irregularities
Conflict of interests
Former president, N. Srinivasan was criticised for his alleged biased behaviour towards some state boards, by awarding them ODI, Test and T20 matches in his regime in supposed violation of the board's rotation policy on venues.
The BCCI constitution was amended during Srinivasan's tenure as the treasurer to allow him to buy a franchise through his India Cements company during the 2008 Indian Premier League Team Auction. Srinivasan courted further controversy for appointing India and Chennai Super Kings captain Mahendra Singh Dhoni as a vice-president of India Cements. Srinivasan's son-in-law Gurunath Meiyappan, also closely associated with Chennai Super Kings, IPL franchise was arrested for alleged involvement in spot fixing and betting by Indian police. In 2015, the Supreme Court appointed Lodha Committee suspended the Chennai Super Kings for two years from the Indian Premier League and suspended Meiyappan from cricket activities for life. In 2013, his daughter Rupa Gurunath, president of Tamil Nadu cricket association was found guilty of 'conflict of interest'  by BCCI ethics officer, Justice D.K. Jain. In 2015, Srinivasan was barred from  BCCI contesting elections due to his 'conflict of interest' by the Supreme Court which also struck down the amendments of BCCI constitution that had allowed him to own and operate and IPL franchise while also serving on the board .
BCCI does not allow its contracted, non-contracted, national and domestic players to participate in any cricket leagues abroad. Only players retired from all formats of Indian cricket, can take part in foreign leagues as per BCCI's rule. Players such as Adam Gilchrist had raised question marks on this policy. Indian players such as Suresh Raina, Robin Uthappa have been urged board to allow non-contracted players like them to participate in foreign leagues.
Politicians in the board
Many politicians from multiple political parties have held different positions in BCCI so far, such as Sharad Pawar of Nationalist Congress Party, Madhavrao Scindia of Congress party and Anurag Thakur of Bhartiya Janata Party (BJP) were presidents, his brother Arun Singh Dhumal is current IPL chairman. As of 18 October 2022, son of Home minister of India Amit Shah, Jay Shah is the incumbent secretary. Rajiv Shukla of Congress party associated with BCCI from decades is present vice-president. Ashish Shelar of BJP is treasurer.
Not only BCCI but also most of the state and regional cricket association are indulge in this phenomenon, in which politicians runs these associations. Politicians tend to use state and regional cricket associations as a ladder to reach at the top in the Indian cricket administration : BCCI. For example present Indian prime minister Narendra Modi was president of Gujarat Cricket Association for brief period of time form 16 September 2009 to 30 May 2014; union minister Jyotiraditya Scindia (BJP) is a powerful politician in Madhya Pradesh Cricket Association (MPCA), Since April 2022, his son is vice-president of Gwalior Division Cricket Association, which is part of MPCA.  After Lodha commitee's suggestions or guidelines, which states that no Incumbent minister or MP can held office in BCCI or State association, politicians found an alternate way to bypass it, now politicians tend to place their sons, brothers etc on the posts and indirectly run the post.
Reforms: 2017 Committee of Administrators
The BCCI has been criticised for its monopolistic practices and has suffered from allegations of corruption and cronyism. . The Supreme Court on 30 January 2017 nominated a four-member panel Committee of Administrators:- Vinod Rai, Ramachandra Guha, Vikram Limaye and Diana Edulji to look after the administration of the BCCI in order to implement Lodha Committee reforms. Vinod Rai, a retired civil servant and the former Comptroller and Auditor General of India led the four-member panel to look after the administrative duties of the board until the elections could be conducted.
BCCI was constantly opposed to come under National Anti-Doping Agency (NADA). On 9 August 2019, the BCCI agreed to adhere to the anti-doping mechanisms governed by the NADA.
Sunil Joshi, former Indian cricket team spinner was named as chairman of the national selection panel by the Cricket Advisory Committee (CAC) of BCCI replacing M.S.K. Prasad in that role.
Rebel league
BCCI banned former Indian captain Kapil Dev for his involvement in an un-sanctioned, private cricket league, the Indian Cricket League, which launched in 2007. It was owned and operated by Essel Group. The board also banned Indian players who played in this league including Hemang Badani, Dinesh Mongia, Rohan Gavaskar, and Ambati Rayudu. Later BCCI gave amnesty to these players, and lifted the ban, after they ended their ties with this league. It blacklisted Zee of Essel group due to this league, the board removed them from it in 2021. Due to blacklisting, Zee was prohibited from buying BCCI's media rights.
Organisation
Constitution
The BCCI is governed by its constitution. The board has been prohibited by the Supreme Court of India from amending its own constitution without its approval.
Headquarters
The headquarters of the BCCI's headquarters is located at the Cricket Centre within the premises of the Mumbai Cricket Association at the Wankhede Stadium in the Churchgate area of Mumbai, Maharashtra where it occupies three floors of a four-floor building.
Legal status
According to BCCI, it is an autonomous body and does not receive any grants or funding from the Indian government. In 2004 in Supreme court of India board's lawyers said that Indian cricket team play as, "the official team of BCCI and not the official team of India." The lawyers also claimed that we (BCCI) "do not even fly the national flag" and the board never "uses any national emblem in the activities of the Board." While it recommends its players for prestigious awards such as Arjuna award the BCCI claims not to be a national sports federation. BCCI is registered as a society in Tamil Nadu state under societies registration act and it denies coming under Article 12 of Indian constitution. From its foundation BCCI did not get sanctioned by Government of India and it started as governing body of Cricket in India as well as representative of India. BCCI is alleged to use British Raj emblem without prior permission from government of India and its
offence under the Emblem and Names (Prevention of Improper Use) Act, 1950.
Logo
BCCI's logo is derived from Star of India. According to Information Commissioner Sridhar Acharyulu, BCCI's logo was designed by the British Raj in 1928. It is 90% similar to Star of India sign.
Anti-Corruption Unit
The BCCI has a special anti-corruption unit, which is responsible for preventing any malpractice in cricket within India. This unit is responsible for investigating unlawful activities such as betting, spot-fixing, match-fixing and corrupt approaches of players. Shabir Hussein has been the head of this unit since April 2021 .
Ethics Officer
Former supreme court judge Vineet Saran is the incumbent 'Ethics officer and ombudsman' of BCCI. He was appointed in June 2022. Board created this 'Ethics officer ' post in 2017 due to increasing complaints of conflict of interest in the board's office holders, employees and associated peoples. The officer look the complaints of conflict of interest.
Affiliated members
Membership of the Board of Control for Cricket in India consists of full members and associate members; only full members have voting rights in annual general meeting.
Following the Lodha Committee's recommendations in 2015, full membership was to be restricted to state and union territory associations, limited to one representative body per state. Subsequently, several state associations became full members and, because the states of Gujarat and Maharashtra each had three members, Mumbai, Baroda, Saurashtra and Vidharbh were relegated to associate membership. Neither Cricket Club of India nor National Cricket Club field teams in major domestic tournaments but as founding members of BCCI had full voting rights until the Lodha Committee recommendations were implemented. Some of the recommendations that were implemented have since been reversed. In 2018, Railways, Services and Universities regained full membership, and in 2022, the rule restricting states to a single full member was removed, meaning that Mumbai, Baroda, Saurashtra and Vidharbh once again became full members.
President
President is an elected position, and is considered the most powerful position in the BCCI administration. Due to financial clout and popularity of cricket in the country, it is considered as a highly prestigious position.  President presides the meeting of apex council and general body. He signs audited annual accounts as well as financial statements.
The full member state boards can vote in the presidents' election. Gujarat, Maharashtra has more than one full member but as per Lodha committee – supreme court guidelines any state can have only one vote in the election at any given time.
Former India, Karnataka cricketer, national selector, India under-19 teams' coach and president of the Karnataka State Cricket Association Roger Binny is the incumbent president of the BCCI. He succeeded Sourav Ganguly. Binny is a member of India's 1983 world cup winner team. He took charge in October 2022.
Secretary
'BCCI secretary' is the second most powerful and important post after president. Secretary signs all the contracts and carries correspondence on behalf of BCCI. Jay Shah is the incumbent secretary. The secretary have power to take action or defend office bearers, employees of the board.

CEO
As per the eligibility criteria the person who have at least 10 years of working experience in a 100 crore INR or more annual turnover company on management position can be a CEO in this bord. Hemang Amin is the incumbent CEO. Rahul Johari became the first CEO after this position created in the board. The post was created after the recommendation of supreme court appointed Lodha Committee. The CEO of BCCI handles its management duties, he reports to the BCCI secretary.
National selectors
On 18 November 2022, BCCI sacked all the senior selector after defeat in the semifinal of the  2022 ICC Men's T20 World Cup. New senior selection panel is yet be selected and announced.
Domestic tournaments
The BCCI organise following men's and women's national level tournaments :
Men's domestic cricket
Women's domestic cricket
Women's junior tournaments
Men's Junior cricket tournaments
BCCI organise following national junior cricket tournaments, in which junior teams of state association's participate : 
Finances
Television production
In 2012, BCCI established its own production house. BCCI's broadcast service does the production work of Indian cricket team's international matches at home as well as of leading domestic championships and IPL . Till 2012, the company who holds the media rights used to do the production work in exchange of money from BCCI. Previously Nimbus sports did production for the board for some years. BCCI's production house holds production rights and copyrights of Indian cricket. It broadcasts video highlights of domestic as well as bilateral cricket series, on its website, www.bcci.tv .
Financial clout
BCCI does not depend on the Government of India for its finances and hence is a private entity.
In 2020, with US$405 million out of US$1,534 million, India had 26% share in the ICC FTP income disbursed to 10 Test playing nations, while the England and Wales Cricket Board received US$139 million as the second highest earner.
In 2020, to revive the financial health of other boards after the global economic decline and the significantly reduced income of most boards due to the COVID-19 pandemic, ICC will change its FTP to schedule to organise more bilateral matches of other nations with India.
Influence in the cricketing world
The BCCI is regarded as cricket's big economic player. ICC is mainly governed by board of directors which are nominated by each member board. Every member board needs bilateral matches with BCCI for high media rights value. Those boards which go along with BCCI, get good number of bilateral matches leading to high income during bilateral series. They generally work at ICC in consultation with BCCI. In 2009, the ICC and BCCI were in disagreement over the WADA Whereabouts clause.
Total annual income
In FY 2019–2020, the total annual income of BCCI is estimated to be over INR 3,730 crore (US$535 million), including INR 2,500 crore (US$345 million) from the IPL, INR 950 crore (US$139 million) from bilateral cricket with other nations, and INR 380 crore (US$51 million per year or total US$405 million for 8 years) from India's share of ICC revenue.
ICC income share
In 2020, as per the present eight-year Future Tours Program (FTP), India receives a total of US$405 million from ICC, as contrasted with US$139 million to the England and Wales Cricket Board, while US$128 million for each of Cricket Australia, Cricket South Africa, Pakistan Cricket Board, New Zealand Cricket, Sri Lanka Cricket, Cricket West Indies and Bangladesh Cricket Board, and US$94 million for Zimbabwe.
Media rights
In 2018 Star India won the BCCI's exclusive media rights for the period of year 2018– 2023. Star India won the rights to broadcast Indian cricket team's matches on their TV channels such as Star Sports 1 HD, Star Sports 2 HD etc. and rights to broadcast on Disney+ Hotstar in 6138.10 crore rupees.
On average, Star Sports pays 60.1 crore rupees per match to the board. The deal also include rights to broadcast men's domestic tournaments such as Vijay Hazare trophy, Ranji Trophy, Irani Cup, Duleep trophy, Mushtaq Ali trophy and women's international cricket matches in India on Star Sport channel and Disney+ Hotstar.
The IPL is the BCCI's largest source of income by medium of media rights. From 2018 to 2022, global rights were awarded to Star India for ₹16,347.5 crore (US$2.0 billion). In 2022, BCCI sold IPL media rights in total 48,390 cr, comprising television rights of 23,575 cr and digital rights of 20,500 cr won by Disney and Viacom18 respectively. This deal includes 410 matches from year 2023–2027. Viacom 18 won the exclusive digital rights for Indian subcontinent and for streaming in UK, Australia-New Zealand and South Africa, while Times Internet won global streaming rights in Middle East, North Africa and United States. Due to this deal IPL became the second most richest league in the world behind National Football League (NFL).
Sponsorship rights
Star India is the official broadcaster of BCCI, MPL is kit sponsor, Byju's is team sponsor, Mastercard is title sponsor for all the bilateral series, which take place in India and for all the domestic championships such as Ranji trophy, Vijay Hazare trophy, Sayyed Mushtaq Ali trophy, Irani trophy, Duleep trophy and Deodhar trophy etc. Dream 11, Ambuja and Hyundai are official partners.
Ticketing rights
BCCI sold IPL 2022, offline – online tickets selling rights to BookMyShow, a ticket selling Indian company. The deal had been included management of spectators entry on stadium gates. Paytm insider app also often sells bilateral series's tickets.
Cricketing infrastructure development
On 12 September 2006, BCCI announced that it will spend ₹ 1,600 crore over the subsequent one year to upgrade the cricket stadiums around the country.
In the early half of the 2000s it established National Cricket Academy at Bangalore. It got built to train new upcoming cricketers. On 17 February 2022 BCCI president Sourav Ganguly founded new NCA facility at Bangalore. It is being built in 40 acres land near airport. On completion it will have three cricket grounds, 40 practice pitches, rooms to reside, swimming pool, gymnasium. It will be built in 200 crore rupees.
Donations
In March 2020, BCCI President Sourav Ganguly donated ₹ 51 crore to the PM CARES Fund to combat the COVID-19 pandemic in India. BCCI to donate 10-litre 2000 oxygen concentrators to help India fight COVID-19.
Encouragement to other sports
 It announced reward to the medal winners of the country of Tokyo Olympics.
Contracts
The BCCI created four grades for contracted male players A+, A, B, C and three grades for contracted female players A, B, C. The male players who are in A+ grade get 7 crores rupees in a year. Players of A grade get 5 crore, B grade's players gets 3 crores and C grade's players receive 1 crore rupees in one year. The female players who are in A grade get 50 lakhs rupees in a year, B grade gets 30 lakhs rupees in a year and C grade gets 10 lakhs rupees in a year.
Pension schemes
BCCI give pension to the former domestic and international players who played for the country. On 31 December 1993 BCCI decided to give 50,000 rupees pension to the players, who played more than 25 International Test match for the nation. The board gives 15,000 rupees pension to the players, who played Ranji trophy before 1957– 1958 season. In 2013 BCCI gave one time benefits to the domestic players who played more than 75 first class matches. For women's cricketers the board give 22500 rupees per month pension to the players who played 10 or more Tests for the country and 15000 rupees per month for who played 5 to 9 Tests.
Insurance
BCCI have taken insurance for nearly everything which are related to them such as they covered mediclaim for their employees, they have insured international and domestic players for loss of fees due to injury, matches, their old office and new office at Wankhede stadium, IPL matches. For it BCCI pay huge premium every year. In case of cancellation of IPL, domestic, international cricket matches, opening IPL shows which takes place at starting of the season due to bad weather, riot, fire then BCCI receives payments fom insurance companies. Board provides five lakh rupees insurance to the players, who played under board.
Taxation payments
In 2018, the total amount of tax ₹ 472.22 crore, which was outstanding as on 1 April 2018, was cleared along with interest in September 2018 but the Department of Revenue has issued a notice for tax evasion to the BCCI. The Department of Revenue has asked the BCCI to pay another outstanding income tax worth ₹ 1,303 crore, according to details submitted by the Finance Ministry in the Parliament in February 2019.
Earlier in 2007–08, although the Income Tax Department withdrew this exemption, BCCI only paid tax amounting to ₹41.9 crore (US$5.2 million) against its tax liability of ₹413 crore (US$52 million) in the 2009–2010 financial year
In 2012, BCCI had avoided taxes on its income, claiming exemption as a charitable organisation.
In popular culture
See also
Notes