Boomerang (TV network)
Boomerang is an American cable television network and streaming service owned by Warner Bros. Discovery Networks, a subsidiary of Warner Bros. Discovery.


Boomerang debuted in 1992 as a programming block on Cartoon Network, dedicated to classic animation from the WB library (including Warner Bros. Cartoons and Hanna-Barbera productions, among many others), and was eventually spun-off into its own separate network in 2000. In the late 2000s, Boomerang would engage in drift by airing more modern and contemporary programming, including reruns of shows that were either acquired or produced for Cartoon Network. A 2015 relaunch (which aimed to promote Boomerang as a "second flagship" brand alongside Cartoon Network) saw Boomerang begin to produce its own original programming, focusing primarily on reboots of popular franchises such as Looney Tunes and Scooby-Doo. In 2017, Boomerang launched its own subscription video on-demand over-the-top streaming service.
As of September 2018, Boomerang is available to approximately 38.312 million pay television households in the United States.
History
Turner Broadcasting System built up an extensive catalogue of MGM and early Warner Brothers cartoons in the 1980s. These made up much of the extensive children's programming on TBS and TNT, which was phased out after the creation of the Cartoon Network on October 1, 1992.
Boomerang was created as a new home for these and similar cartoons. It originated as a programming block on Cartoon Network that debuted on December 8, 1992. It originally aired for four hours every weekend, but the block's start time had changed frequently. The Saturday block moved to Saturday afternoons, then back to the early morning, and the Sunday block moved to Sunday evenings. Eventually, Boomerang was shortened by an hour, reducing it from four hours to three each weekend.
With Cartoon Network downplaying its archival programming in favor of newer original series, Turner Broadcasting System introduced a standalone Boomerang cable channel on April 1, 2000. The Cartoon Network block continued to run under the new Boomerang channel branding until October 3, 2004.
On February 4, 2014, as part of Turner Broadcasting's 2014 upfronts, it was announced that Boomerang would become advertising-supported, seeking additional international distribution. In October 2014, Cartoon Network unveiled a global rebranding for Boomerang, which first launched in Latin America in late September, and arrived in the United States on January 19, 2015. Alongside the previously-announced plan to introduce advertising, the network planned to introduce original programming for the first time, and place a particular focus on the archive's most well-known franchises with an explicitly family-friendly approach. Turner executives described the changes as being an effort to grow Boomerang into a "second flagship" on par with the main Cartoon Network channel.
In 2017, an online Boomerang video-on-demand service was launched. In 2018, 3rd Annual Shorty Social Good Awards nominated Boomerang and Captain Planet Foundation for Best in Entertainment. May 2020 saw the launch of HBO Max, a general entertainment video-on-demand service from Boomerang's corporate parent that includes much of Boomerang's programming.
Programming
Historically, Boomerang avoided overt channel drift and, despite adding newer content to its library, continued to air programming from the breadth of its archives. By spring 2014, however, most of its archival programming was relegated to graveyard slots while the daytime schedule became dominated by programming from the 1990s and later. This policy underwent a partial reversal in April 2017, with a larger focus on shows from the 2010s, before older Cartoon Network series returned to Boomerang's schedule from January 2018 to May 2019, and again in half-hour time slots in September 2020. Tom and Jerry, Looney Tunes, The Smurfs, and various entries in the Scooby-Doo franchise have more or less had permanent places on the schedule since the rebrand, while previous network mainstays The Flintstones and The Jetsons returned in a late-night time slot in July 2018 before leaving the schedule again in November of that year.
Not all of the Warner Bros. animation library is exclusive to Boomerang. A portion of that library which includes series produced in collaboration with Steven Spielberg's Amblin Entertainment (including Tiny Toon Adventures and most of Animaniacs), as well as most works involving Batman and Superman (such as the DC Animated Universe), is put out for license to other networks; those properties most recently aired on the Hub Network from late 2012 until its closure in October 2014. In addition, Warner Bros.'s collection of Christmas specials — including the latter half of the Rankin/Bass Productions library — is licensed to AMC for their Best Christmas Ever block as of 2018; those specials previously aired on Freeform and its predecessors for nearly 20 years, as part of their 25 Days of Christmas lineup. In 2019, former channel fixture The Flintstones was licensed out to MeTV; in 2021, that network introduced two morning blocks that feature Warner Bros. and Paramount Global content (including Looney Tunes/Merrie Melodies, Popeye, Betty Boop, and MGM theatrical shorts), many of which still air on Boomerang. MeTV also acquired another former Boomerang fixture in that year: The Jetsons.
Boomerang itself occasionally licenses programming from other distributors, such as with The Rocky and Bullwinkle Show (which joined the lineup for a short run in August and September 2013) and with Garfield and Friends (which joined in September 2019).
Although Boomerang's programming philosophy was originally intended to showcase classic cartoons, newer shows have been added in recent years, some even before the rebrand. From January to December 2012, new episodes of the Italian animated series Puppy in My Pocket: Adventures in Pocketville aired on the channel. Wedgies, a series of animated interstitials that previously aired on Cartoon Network, were reintroduced in 2013. In December 2014, Boomerang added Teen Titans Go! and The Amazing World of Gumball to its lineup, alongside their airings on Cartoon Network; those shows left in April 2017. On June 28, 2015, it was announced that Boomerang would receive original programs such as New Looney Tunes, Be Cool, Scooby-Doo!, and an animated adaptation of Bunnicula. Throughout mid-2018, Boomerang added re-runs of modern Cartoon Network series to its lineup, including Regular Show, Mighty Magiswords, Adventure Time, and Steven Universe. On May 2, 2022, Boomerang brought back reruns of Teen Titans Go! and The Amazing World of Gumball, and also added two additional modern Cartoon Network shows to their schedule: Craig of the Creek and Total Dramarama.  Those shows left on October 28, 2022.
Boomerang has been used to burn-off programs acquired for Cartoon Network which have rated too low to remain on that network's schedule, much like Nickelodeon's spin-off Nicktoons and TeenNick. Boomerang also simulcasts some episodes of original Cartoon Network programming, mainly season or series premieres and finales.
Programming blocks
Because of Boomerang's fluid schedule, programming blocks used to air for a few months, then be removed from the schedule, only to be added again a few months later, until they were almost all phased out in late 2014, due to the network's rebrand.
Current
Former blocks
Special events
International
Boomerang, originally established as a cable channel in the United States, has expanded worldwide. Each of these networks was aligned globally in 2015 under one unified branding to reflect a family co-viewing network.