Boston Brahmin
The Boston Brahmins or Boston elite are members of Boston's traditional upper class. They are often associated with Harvard University; Anglicanism; and traditional Anglo-American customs and clothing. Descendants of the earliest English colonists are typically considered to be the most representative of the Boston Brahmins. They are considered White Anglo-Saxon Protestants (WASPs).
Etymology
The doctor and writer Oliver Wendell Holmes, Sr. coined the term "Brahmin Caste of New England" in an 1860 story in The Atlantic Monthly. The term Brahmin refers to the priestly caste within the four castes in the Hindu caste system. By extension, it was applied in the United States to the old wealthy New England families of British Protestant origin that became influential in the development of American institutions and culture. The influence of the old American gentry has been reduced in modern times, but some vestiges remain, primarily in the institutions and the ideals that they championed in their heyday.
Characteristics
The nature of the Brahmins is hinted at by the doggerel "Boston Toast" by Holy Cross alumnus John Collins Bossidy:
While some 19th-century Brahmin families of large fortune were of common origin, still fewer were of an aristocratic origin. The new families were often the first to seek, in typically British fashion, suitable marriage alliances with those old aristocratic New England families that were descended from landowners in England to elevate and cement their social standing. The Winthrops, Dudleys, Saltonstalls, Winslows, and Lymans (descended from English magistrates, gentry, and aristocracy) were, by and large, happy with this arrangement. All of Boston's "Brahmin elite", therefore, maintained the received culture of the old English gentry, including cultivating the personal excellence that they imagined maintained the distinction between gentlemen and freemen, and between ladies and women. They saw it as their duty to maintain what they defined as high standards of excellence, duty, and restraint. Cultivated, urbane, and dignified, a Boston Brahmin was supposed to be the very essence of enlightened aristocracy. The ideal Brahmin was not only wealthy, but displayed what was considered suitable personal virtues and character traits.
The Brahmin was expected to maintain the customary English reserve in his dress, manner, and deportment, cultivate the arts, support charities such as hospitals and colleges, and assume the role of community leader.: 14  Although the ideal called on him to transcend commonplace business values, in practice many found the thrill of economic success quite attractive. The Brahmins warned each other against avarice and insisted upon personal responsibility. Scandal and divorce were unacceptable. This culture was buttressed by the strong extended family ties present in Boston society. Young men attended the same prep schools, colleges, and private clubs, and heirs married heiresses. Family not only served as an economic asset, but also as a means of moral restraint. Most belonged to the Unitarian or Episcopal churches, although some were Congregationalists or Methodists. Politically they were successively Federalists, Whigs, and Republicans. They were marked by their manners and once distinctive elocution. Their distinctive Anglo-American manner of dress has been much imitated and is the foundation of the style now informally known as preppy. Many of the Brahmin families trace their ancestry back to the original 17th- and 18th-century colonial ruling class consisting of Massachusetts governors and magistrates, Harvard presidents, distinguished clergy, and fellows of the Royal Society of London (a leading scientific body), while others entered New England aristocratic society during the 19th century with their profits from commerce and trade, often marrying into established Brahmin families.
List of families
Adams
Adams Family
Amory
Amory Family
Appleton
Appleton Family
Patrilineal line:
Other notable relatives:
Bacon
Bacon Family
Bates
Bates family
Originally from Boston and Britain:
Boylston
Boylston Family
Bradlee
Bradlee Family
Direct line:
Brinley
Brinley Family of Boston, Newport, and Shelter Island, NY
Buckingham
Buckingham Family
Originally from Boston and Britain:
Chaffee/Chafee
Chaffee Family
Originally of Hingham, Massachusetts:
Choate
Choate Family
Coffin
Coffin Family
Originally of Newbury and Nantucket:
Coolidge
Cooper
Crowninshield
Crowninshield Family
Descendants by marriage:
Cushing
Cushing Family
Originally of Hingham, Massachusetts:
Descendant by marriage:
Dana
Dana Family
Delano
Delano Family
Dudley
Dudley Family
Dwight
Dwight Family
Eliot
Eliot Family
Emerson
Emerson Family
Endicott
Endicott Family
Salem:
Dedham:
Everett
Everett Family
Descendants through the marriage of Sarah Preston Everett (1796–1866) and noted journalist Nathan Hale (1784–1863):
Fabens
Of Marblehead and Salem:
Forbes
Forbes Family
Gardner
Gardner Family
Originally of Essex county:
Gillett
Hallowell
Hallowell Family
Healey/Dall
Holmes
Holmes Family
Jackson
Jackson Family
Knowles
Knowles Family
Lawrence
Lawrence Family
Descendant by marriage: Abbott Lawrence Lowell (1856–1943), president of Harvard University
Lodge
Lodge Family
Lowell
Lyman
Minot
Minot Family
Norcross
Norcross family
Original from Watertown, Massachusetts
Oakes
Oakes family
Otis
Otis family
Paine
Paine Family
Palfrey
Palfrey Family
Parkman
Parkman Family
Peabody
Peabody Family
Perkins
Perkins Family
Phillips
Phillips Family
Other notable relatives:
Putnam
Putnam Family
Quincy
Quincy Family
Rice
Rice Family
Originally of Sudbury, Massachusetts:
Saltonstall
Saltonstall Family
Sargent
Sears
Sears Family
Sedgwick
Sedgwick Family


Shattuck
Shaw
Thayer
Thayer Family
Thorndike
Thorndike Family
Tudor
Tudor Family
Warren
Weld
Weld Family
Whitney
Wigglesworth
Wigglesworth Family
Winthrop
Winthrop Family
Patrilineal descendants:
Other descendants: