Characters of God of War
The characters of the God of War video game franchise belong to a fictional universe based on Greek mythology and Norse mythology. As such, the series features a range of traditional figures, including those from Greek mythology, such as the Olympian Gods, Titans, and Greek heroes, and those from Norse mythology, including the Æsir and Vanir gods and other beings. A number of original characters have also been created to supplement storylines.


The overall story arc focuses on the series' primary playable single-player character, the protagonist Kratos, a Spartan warrior haunted by visions of himself accidentally killing his wife and child. The character finally avenges his family by killing his former master and manipulator, Ares, the God of War. Although Kratos becomes the new God of War, he is still plagued by nightmares and is eventually betrayed by Zeus, the King of the Olympian Gods—revealed by the goddess Athena to be Kratos' father. The constant machinations of the gods and Titans and their misuse of Kratos eventually drive him to destroy Mount Olympus. Many years following the destruction of Olympus, Kratos ends up in Midgard fathering a son named Atreus (known to prophecy as Loki) with the Jötunn warrior Faye. Their journey to keep a promise to the boy's late mother ends with Kratos and Atreus becoming enemies to the Norse gods, and ultimately set about the events of Ragnarök, a catastrophic event that the Allfather Odin was desperate to prevent, but ultimately ends with Odin's death and the destruction of Asgard.
God of War (2005), created by Sony's Santa Monica Studio, was the inaugural game in the series, the main part of which continued with God of War II (2007), God of War III (2010), and series prequel Ascension (2013); and side games Betrayal (2007), Chains of Olympus (2008),  and Ghost of Sparta (2010). These seven games comprised the Greek era of the series. The Norse era began with the sequel to God of War III, which is also titled God of War (2018) and concluded with Ragnarök (2022). The God of War mythos expanded into literature, with a novelization of the original God of War published in 2010, and a six-issue comic series that introduced new characters and plot developments that was published from 2010–11. A novelization of God of War II was published in 2013. A prequel graphic novel titled Rise of the Warrior (2012–13) was released in the lead up to Ascension's release and is the backstory of the player's multiplayer character. To go along with the 2018 game, a text-based game, A Call from the Wilds, was released in February 2018, followed by a novelization in August, and then a two-volume comic series that began publication in November, serving as a prequel to the 2018 game.
God of War has become a highly lucrative franchise on account of the commercial and critical success of the series. Products include action figures, artwork, clothing, Slurpee cups, sweepstakes, and special edition video game consoles. The character of Kratos received positive comments from reviewers, and was described as a "sympathetic antihero" by GameSpy. Game Guru claimed "Practically anyone, even if they hadn't played any of the God of War games, would know about Kratos." Several reviewers have praised the portrayal of other characters: PALGN claimed that the original God of War's voice acting is "up there with the best", while IGN have complimented most of the games in the series, saying of  God of War II that the characters were "timeless" and the voice acting was "great".
Concept and creation
During the creation of  God of War, the game's director David Jaffe attempted to create a version of Kratos that looked brutal but had a different appearance from what is considered to be the traditional Greek hero. The character's traditional armor was removed to show the character's individualism, and details such as hair and other "flowing things" were removed. Jaffe said of his final version of the character, that while "[Kratos] may not totally feel at home in Ancient Greece from a costume standpoint, I think he achieves the greater purpose which is to give players a character who they can play who really does just let them go nuts and unleash the nasty fantasies that they have in their head."
When designing Ares, Charlie Wen was advised that the character should be 90% elemental and 5–10% human, then began sketching. He said that the rest of the team liked the designs, but were uncertain about execution. The transition towards Ares' human form was slow, and Wen said of the final design, "he's still a huge guy, but he's got all this armor on that allows him to do all these things." Like most of the Olympian gods in God of War (2005), Zeus first appeared as a floating translucent head, and was modeled on the typical representation of the god in Greek mythology. Cory Barlog (Game Director of God of War II) said that for God of War II, they wanted to maintain Zeus' appearance from literature, but also to add their own interpretation to the character. Zeus' human appearance was originally designed by Charlie Wen for God of War II. This design was also used in God of War III, with updated graphics and the addition of an arm piece during the final fight. Andy Park was responsible for designing Zeus' spirit form for the final fight. Park produced several sketches, and imagined Zeus as a "massive tornado creature with lightning searing throughout the form." Park said that the ultimate goal was that "we are looking at Zeus, but it is him transformed into a big cloud of smoke."
Hades first appeared in God of War (2005); the original design portrayed Hades as a fiery, demonic face with horns. Statues in the game adhered to this design. Hades' character design was changed in God of War II, with the character now appearing in a more human-like form with spikes protruding from his body and wielding a pair of chained claws, similar to Kratos' chained blades. The new design featured a helmet that appeared to cover a fiery face, which in God of War III, it is eventually revealed to be very grotesque but more human-like than the original design from God of War. Hermes was originally designed for God of War II by Andy Park and did appear in the final cut scene of the game. For God of War III, Park updated the design and painting of the character. Park said he "wanted to create a character that was sly, cunning, and a bit comical in both appearance and personality" and he imagined he would be "much like a dancer."
The Titan Oceanus was sketched by Erik San Juan and was originally intended to appear in God of War II in a completely watery form with no feet. This concept, however, was cut during development. Oceanus appeared in God of War III, with a similar appearance to the other Titans and with an emphasis on lightning instead of the original watery design. Oceanus's original watery design was the basis of the design for Poseidon's avatar sea construct for God of War III.
The character Daedalus was designed by Izzy Medrano, who said that he imagined Daedalus as a brilliant architect gone mad, and that Daedalus, similar to Kratos, was a pawn of the gods. The character was originally intended to have long white hair, but was eventually rendered bald, "as long hair is a difficult thing to manage." Icarus was conceived as an "old disgusting man" and portrayed as an evil, although slightly comedic, character.
Medrano also designed Pandora, who he said is vital in reintroducing the player to the human side of Kratos. Medrano also said that they knew Pandora had to be young and reminiscent of Kratos' daughter, Calliope, and that "[Pandora] had to be pretty without being sexy and spunky without being saucy." Medrano said the character's final attire was a "Greek Punk" fashion style.
The first version of the Gorgon, Medusa, was to have five feet, but due to perceived animation difficulties, the final version had one tail. Other Gorgons in the game adhered to this design. The goddess Artemis was considered for inclusion in God of War: Ascension as a playable female character, offering alternative combat options. Game Director Todd Papy said she would have been depicted as half-human and half-feline, with the head and torso of a woman and the legs of a lioness. However, she was ultimately cut from the game and thus only appears in the original God of War as a translucent head.
Overview
This section shows characters who have appeared in two or more installments in the series.
Major characters
Kratos
Kratos is a power-hungry Spartan who, to save his life, was eventually forced to serve the Olympian god Ares. During one murderous rampage, Kratos accidentally killed his wife and child. Kratos renounced Ares, became a tormented soul (including imprisonment by the Furies), and served the gods for ten years in hopes of becoming free of the nightmares. He eventually killed Ares and became the God of War, but was betrayed by his father, Zeus. A series of attempts to free himself from the influence of the gods and Titans followed, culminating in a final confrontation with Zeus, ending in the god's death and the reign of the Olympian Gods. In the aftermath, Athena appeared and Kratos sacrificed himself to prevent her from becoming the supreme goddess of the world. Many years later, surviving his fatal sacrifice, Kratos now lives in the world of the Norse gods in Midgard where he now has a son named Atreus. Following the death of his second wife Faye, he and Atreus journey to the highest peak of the nine realms to fulfill her promise and spread her ashes there. Along their journey, Kratos eventually reveals that he is a god to Atreus, and after defeating Baldur and in turn becoming an enemy of the Norse gods, he finally reveals his troubled past to his son and that they should learn from past mistakes.
The character was originally voiced by Terrence C. Carson; his final portrayal of the character was in 2013's Ascension. Christopher Judge replaced TC Carson in 2018's God of War. Antony Del Rio voiced the character as a child in Ghost of Sparta (2010).
Athena
Athena was the Goddess of Wisdom and Kratos' mentor and ally throughout the Greek era in the series, and is revealed to be his older sister. In Chains of Olympus, Athena initially tasked Kratos to find Helios as in the absence of light, the god Morpheus had caused many of the gods to fall into a deep slumber. In God of War (2005), she gave Kratos the mission of killing Ares, as Zeus had forbidden divine involvement, and was instrumental in allowing Kratos to become the new God of War. Although she begged Kratos to stop his second quest for the Ambrosia of Asclepius in the comic series (2010–11) and lied to him about his brother Deimos in Ghost of Sparta, Athena was still sympathetic towards Kratos even after he renounced the gods and was betrayed by Zeus in God of War II. Athena died trying to protect Zeus from Kratos, and was resurrected and elevated to a new level of understanding in God of War III. With ulterior motives, Athena became Kratos' ally once more and guided him to the Flame of Olympus surrounding Pandora's Box, which allowed Kratos to kill Zeus and end the reign of Mount Olympus, once Kratos defeated and killed nearly all the gods, Athena appeared to him and told him he has the power of hope, and demanded that he should give her the power so she could rule humanity as its sole goddess, though Kratos foils this attempt by stabbing himself to release it instead to the whole world, leaving Athena enraged and disappointed at him, leaving the latter to seemingly die. Her spirit later returns to Kratos in God of War (2018) to haunt and taunt him about his past that he had kept secret from his son Atreus. As he was retrieving his old weapons, the Blades of Chaos, she said he was nothing more than a monster, to which Kratos replied that he was not her monster anymore.
The character was voiced by Carole Ruggier in 2005's God of War, 2007's God of War II, and 2018's God of War. Erin Torpey voiced the character in Chains of Olympus (2008), God of War III (2010), and Ghost of Sparta (2010).
Gaia
Gaia was the mother of the Titans and embodiment of Earth. At the request of Zeus' mother Rhea, Gaia raised and protected the young Zeus to prevent Cronos from devouring him, as he had devoured his other children. When Zeus grew to manhood, he betrayed Gaia, freed his siblings, and Gaia was banished with her fellow Titans at the conclusion of the Great War. In God of War II, she saved Kratos from the Underworld after a disastrous encounter with Zeus, and directed the Spartan to find the Sisters of Fate in order to take revenge on Zeus. A successful Kratos plucked Gaia and the Titans from the moment in time before their defeat in the Great War to launch an abortive attack on Olympus. In God of War III, Gaia was wounded in the assault on Olympus and abandoned Kratos, stating he was a pawn of the Titans so that they could have their revenge. Kratos eventually found and crippled Gaia, but she returned and interrupted the final battle between the Spartan and Zeus. The pair entered Gaia's neck wound, and with the Blade of Olympus, Kratos destroyed her heart, killing the Titan.
The character was voiced by Linda Hunt in God of War II, and Susan Blakeslee in God of War III. Gaia was also the narrator during cut scenes in God of War, again voiced by Hunt.
Zeus
Zeus was the King of the Olympian Gods. Zeus and Ares believed the destruction of Olympus would come at the hands of Kratos' brother Deimos, so they had Deimos imprisoned and tortured by Thanatos. Many years later, in God of War (2005), Zeus aided Kratos against Ares by bestowing him with the magic, "Zeus' Fury", and as the mysterious gravedigger. In God of War: Ghost of Sparta, Zeus realizes Kratos was the prophesied Marked Warrior, not Deimos. In God of War II, it is revealed that Zeus had become infected with fear. He tricked Kratos into draining his godly powers into the Blade of Olympus, stating it was required to deal with the new threat actually created by Zeus. Kratos, stripped of his power, was mortally wounded while human, and killed by Zeus. With the help of the Titan Gaia, Kratos used the power of the Sisters of Fate to return to the moment Zeus betrayed him and defeated Zeus after extensive combat. Zeus was saved by Athena, who sacrificed herself to preserve Olympus. Before dying, Athena revealed that Kratos is Zeus' son, and that Zeus feared a perpetuation of the son-killing-father cycle, as Zeus imprisoned his father Cronos. This was confirmed in God of War III when Kratos discovered that Zeus was infected with fear when Kratos first opened Pandora's Box and used its power to kill Ares. After a lengthy battle and an enlightening encounter with Pandora in his psyche, Kratos finally overcame and killed Zeus. Later in God of War (2018), Zeus appears as a haunting vision to Kratos while in Helheim.
The character was originally voiced by Paul Eiding in 2005's God of War. Corey Burton, who had previously voiced Zeus in the animated Disney show based on the film Hercules, took over the role in God of War II. He continued it in God of War III, in the multiplayer mode of Ascension, where Zeus appears as one of the four gods that players can pledge their allegiance to, and in 2018's God of War. Fred Tatasciore provided Zeus's voice in Ghost of Sparta's after-game "Combat Arena" mode.
Zeus, as he appears in God of War III, is a downloadable playable character in PlayStation All-Stars Battle Royale (2012); he became available on March 19, 2013.
Atreus
Atreus (/əˈtreɪ.əs/ ə-TRAY-əs) is the young son that Kratos bore with the giant named Faye and has the ability to telepathically hear the thoughts of other beings. His mother taught him archery and how to read runes. His first adventure into the wilderness in A Call from the Wilds brought him to an encounter with some draugr, and he had to be saved by his father Kratos, after which, the two battled a revenant. Following Faye's death of an unknown cause in God of War (2018), Atreus journeys with his father Kratos to fulfill his promise to spread her ashes at the highest peak of the nine realms. Atreus did not know about Kratos' past or that he was a god. After Atreus falls ill due to a mental contradiction of a god thinking himself mortal, Kratos goes to Helheim to retrieve an item to heal him. After Atreus is cured, Kratos reveals that he is a god, but says nothing about his past. Knowing he is a god and thinking he can do anything, Atreus becomes arrogant and murders Modi, despite Kratos ordering not to. The two eventually make amends and team up to face Baldur. After Baldur's defeat, Kratos reveals his past and tells Atreus that they should learn from the mistakes of their predecessors. The two then go to Jötunheim to complete their journey. There, they learn that Faye was a giant, making Atreus part-giant, part-god, and part-mortal due to Kratos being a demigod formerly before becoming a god after killing Ares. It was also revealed that his mother had originally named him Loki, but Kratos chose Atreus, a name of an honorable Spartan comrade of his. The two then spread her ashes at Jötunheim's peak before going home. Atreus then has a vision that years later, at the end of Fimbulwinter, Thor will come for them.
He is voiced by Sunny Suljic.
Mímir
Mímir is a former adviser to Odin and claims to be the smartest man alive. Formerly known as the fairy Puck, Mímir migrated from the Celtic world to the Norse world to serve Odin. He became Odin's advisor, enabling his ambitions, until Mímir's peaceful intentions misaligned with Odin's desire for control, resulting in the former's imprisonment for over a hundred years. When Kratos and Atreus encounter him, believing they had reached their goal, Mímir reveals that their goal is actually in Jötunheim and that he can help them get there. He asks Kratos to behead him and have his head reanimated by the Witch of the Woods, revealed by Mímir to be the goddess Freya. After that is done, Mímir then joins Kratos and Atreus on their journey while clipped to Kratos' belt and provides information about the world and the gods through his tales. He returns in Ragnarök, continuing to serve as their counsel, but now regarded as an honorary family member.
The character is voiced by Alastair Duncan.
Freya
Freya is Vanir Goddess of Love and former Queen of the Valkyries. She was previously in an abusive marriage to Odin, who mockingly gave her the nickname Frigg, and is the mother of Baldur and the twin sister of Freyr. Odin banished her to Midgard for her betrayal as she tried to leave him for his abuse and his countless acts of cruelty against the Jötnar. He also stripped her of her Valkyrie wings and cast a spell on her that prevented her from causing harm to any being and prevented her from leaving Midgard. She first encounters Kratos and Atreus in 2018's God of War as a supporting ally after Atreus had shot her friend, the boar Hildisvíni, for "target practice". The two then aid Freya in healing Hildisvíni. She then aided Kratos and Atreus on their journey under the alias, the Witch of the Woods. After her identity was revealed by Mímir, Kratos distrusted her because of his distrust of gods in general. While in Helheim, they learn that she is the mother of Baldur and of the spell she cast on him. She was willing to die for Baldur, even if it meant that Baldur was the one who killed her. After the spell was broken by Atreus, Freya joined the battle between Kratos, Atreus, and Mímir against Baldur by resurrecting the giant Thamur, however Freya is downed by the Jörmungandr and Baldur is defeated. Kratos gave him a chance to retreat, but Baldur instead tried to kill Freya, so Kratos killed Baldur to end the patricide cycle. A grieving Freya then vowed revenge on Kratos for killing her son and taunted him for not revealing his past to Atreus.
She returns in Ragnarök as an antagonist, seeking vengeance against Kratos for Baldur's death and attacking him and Atreus throughout Fimbulwinter. After retrieving her Valkyrie wings again and coming to blows with the two, she decides to spare Kratos so she can use him to remove the spell binding her to Midgard. Kratos manages to make her empathize with him in their pain of losing children and offers forgiveness, and Freya decides to ally with Kratos again after agreeing Odin is their real enemy. After being freed of the spell and reuniting with Freyr, she ultimately joins the group in attacking Asgard in Ragnarök, finally killing Odin and freeing the realms from his control. She later joins Kratos and Mimír in bringing peace to the realms and reclaims her role as queen after defeating Gná.
The character is voiced by Danielle Bisutti.
Odin
Odin was the ruler of Asgard, the All-father of the Nine Realms, and the father of Týr, Thor, Heimdall, and Baldur. An unseen character but perpetrator of the events in 2018's God of War, he is referenced several times and is portrayed to be a cruel, tyrannical and manipulative god who is obsessed with preventing his death at Ragnarök. It was told that he had his own son Týr killed as he thought Týr was going to aid the giants and overthrow him. His ravens, called the Eyes of Odin, are scattered across the realms. Odin was mentioned to have imprisoned Mímir in a tree and tortured him daily, banished his wife Freya from Asgard for betraying him, and instructed Baldur to target Kratos in order to get to Faye.
Odin appears in Ragnarök as the game's main antagonist. After failing to broker peace with Kratos, he then proposes to Atreus for an apprenticeship under his wing before departing. Odin attempted to spy on Kratos, Atreus, and Mímir's activities by posing as Týr, with his guise being a trapped man in Svartalfheim who had become a traumatized and delusional coward. After a fight with his father, Atreus accepts Odin's offer in Asgard, hoping to help Odin find a way to prevent Ragnarök. Odin shows him around Asgard and introduces him to his family before sharing that he needs his help to make a mask to see a rift between realms to know the secrets to the future and the afterlife. Atreus' interactions with Odin's family reveals the effects of the All-father's neglect towards his own kin in pursuit of his own selfish agenda. Eventually, Brok blows his cover as Týr and he kills the dwarf before fleeing, which ironically pushes Kratos' group to instead initiate Ragnarök instead of preventing it. Odin's true nature is revealed to his followers and family during Ragnarök by his use of Midgardian refugees as human shields, which leads to Sif and Thrúd defecting and Odin killing Thor after his son has a change of heart. After a lengthy battle against Kratos, Atreus, Mímir, and Freya during which Atreus destroys the mask, Odin is defeated and his soul was absorbed in a stone by Atreus. The stone is later destroyed by Sindri as revenge for his brother's death, freeing the Nine Realms from Odin's grasp at last.
The character is voiced by Richard Schiff.
Gods
Olympians
Æsir
Vanir
Titans
Greek heroes
Greek mythological characters
Norse mythological characters
Dwarves
Kratos has encountered different Norse dwarves:
Jötunn
The Jötunn are a race of Norse giants. Among the known Jötunn are:
Valkyries
The Valkyries are female warriors and servants of Odin who are responsible for taking warriors to Valhalla upon their death in the mortal realm. Due to Freya's betrayal, Odin cursed the nine Valkyries to remain in a physical form, an unnatural state for a Valkyrie, which drove them to insanity due to a prolonged period in that form. Kratos and Atreus discover the Valkyries across the realms in Odin's hidden chambers. Upon killing their physical form, their spirits are freed from Odin's curse and return to Valhalla.
Original characters (comic series and video games)
Kratos' original family
Other original characters
Reception
God of War received praise for its voice acting. Chris Sell of PALGN stated that the voice acting is "up there with the best" in comparison to other games, and that the cut scenes are "superbly voiced, but it's the narrator of the story that is the most professionally convincing throughout." Eric Blattberg of PlayStation Universe stated that the voice acting is a great feature of the game, that narrator Linda Hunt's "authentic voice really helps set the attitude during the unbelievable [full motion video]'s", and that Kratos "acts and sounds like a badass." Kristan Reed of Eurogamer wrote, "Even the straight-laced voice work is handled with an expertise so sadly lacking in most other videogames." Raymond M. Padilla of GameSpy, wrote that some of the voice acting and music tracks are overstated; one of his few dislikes in the game. Matt Leone of 1UP wrote that "There's a mixture of in-game characters that speak to you and extremely nice CG sequences that show moments such as flashbacks, and it all blends together surprisingly well."
God of War II received similar praise for its voice acting. Chris Roper of IGN said the characters were timeless and the voice acting was great. Kristan Reed said that the voice acting was "top notch." Alex Navarro of GameSpot wrote that "The voice acting is ... all-around excellent, though it's not quite as enjoyable as it was in the last game", and that "Kratos is as gruff and over the top as ever." He praised the supporting voice performances, such as  Linda Hunt as Gaia and the narrator, Corey Burton as Zeus, and Harry Hamlin as Perseus, as "top-notch work." However, Navarro said  that a few of the performances felt "a bit labored or overwrought. In particular, Michael Clarke Duncan as Atlas feels more wooden than imposing. The voice is right, but his performance is oddly subdued." With these exceptions, Navarro said that "this is another enjoyable voice cast." GameSpy described Kratos as a "sympathetic antihero" and Game Guru claimed "Practically anyone, even if they hadn't played any of the God of War games, would know about Kratos."
God of War III received mixed reviews; Chris Roper of IGN stated that the voice acting "could be better", and that some of the characters are the "biggest culprits" to "creating an uneven feeling in the visual presentation" and that they "don't feature the same level of lighting quality or perhaps texture work as others." Roper also said that a few look "fantastic ... but many are clearly not on the same level as Kratos, and some are even only passable as 'good'."
Chris Roper of IGN said that the voice acting on Chains of Olympus was nice. For God of War: Ghost of Sparta, Nicole Tanner of IGN wrote that it "[c]ontinues the tradition of great voice acting" that "we've come to expect from a God of War installment." Joe Juba of Game Informer said that the voice work was solid.
Merchandise
Two series of action figures based on God of War II have been produced by the National Entertainment Collectibles Association (NECA). The first set included two versions of Kratos; one wielding the Blades of Athena and the second wearing the Golden Fleece and holding a gorgon's head. The second set included a twelve-inch figure that plays six game quotes. A second two-figure set was also released, with Kratos wearing the God of War armor. DC Unlimited produced a line of action figures based on God of War III, which included the characters Kratos, Zeus, Hades and Hercules. Between February 1, 2010 and March 31, 2010, 7-Eleven sold a limited edition Slurpee drink called "Kratos Fury", available in four exclusive God of War III cups, which featured codes that could be used to access God of War III and Slurpee-themed downloadable content on the Slurpee website. Kratos' visage has appeared on the PlayStation Portable Chains of Olympus exclusive bundle pack, and on the PlayStation 3 God of War III sweepstakes prize video game consoles like PS4 and Xbox. Other products include artwork, clothing, and sweepstakes.