Chicago Fire (TV series)
Chicago Fire is an American drama television series created by Michael Brandt and Derek Haas, with Dick Wolf as an executive producer. It is the first installment of Wolf Entertainment's Chicago franchise, which deals with different public services in Chicago, Illinois. Chicago Fire follows the professional and personal lives of firefighters, rescue personnel, and paramedics of the Chicago Fire Department at the fictional Firehouse 51. The series premiered on NBC on October 19, 2012. As of 2022, the series had 222 episodes. On February 27, 2020, NBC renewed the series for its ninth, tenth, and eleventh season. The tenth season premiered on September 22, 2021. The eleventh season premiered on September 21, 2022.
Plot
The show explores the lives, both professional and personal, of the firefighters, rescue personnel, and paramedics of the Chicago Fire Department at the fictional Firehouse 51, home of the fictional Engine Company 51, Truck Company 81, Rescue Squad Company 3, Battalion 25, and Ambulance 61. Following the death of veteran firefighter Andrew Darden, loyalties fracture and divide as Lieutenant Matthew Casey, officer-in-charge of Truck Company 81, and Lieutenant Kelly Severide, officer-in-charge of Rescue Squad Company 3, blame each other for the death of their long-time friend and colleague. They are led by the heroic and determined Deputy District Chief Wallace Boden.
Cast
Main
Recurring
Episodes
Crossovers
Production
Development
The series pilot, co-written by creators Michael Brandt and Derek Haas, was filmed in Chicago and, according to an NBC representative, the series would continue to be filmed there.  Producer John L. Roman was involved from the beginning having worked with the Chicago Fire Department and Deputy District Chief Steve "Chik" Chikerotis on Backdraft. Mayor of Chicago Rahm Emanuel made an appearance in the series' pilot episode.  Emanuel stated: "It's easier being mayor than playing mayor. I told them I'd do it under one condition: the TV show is making an investment to the Firefighters' Widows and Orphans Fund."
The title "Chicago Fire" has sparked some confusion in the show's first season in regards to it being shared with a local major professional soccer team; the Chicago Fire Soccer Club (later renamed Chicago Fire FC). Actor Taylor Kinney has said "If you (say) 'We're working on "Chicago Fire,"' they ask you if you're a soccer player". Producer Dick Wolf hoped that fans of the team might watch the show. The Chicago Fire team themselves have accepted the shared name with the show and have shown the series premiere on October 2, 2012, at Toyota Park after a game with the Philadelphia Union.
The network placed an order for the series in May 2012.  After receiving an additional script order in October, Chicago Fire was picked up for a full season on November 8, 2012.  On January 29, 2013, Chicago Fire had its episode total increased from 22 to 23.  One week later, on February 6, 2013, Chicago Fire received one more episode, giving it a total of 24 episodes for season one. The pilot episode had an early release at NBC.com, before the series' premiere on television.
On November 9, 2015, NBC renewed the series for a fifth season. The season premiered on October 11, 2016.
On May 9, 2018, NBC renewed the series for a seventh season, which premiered on September 26, 2018. On February 26, 2019, NBC renewed the series for an eighth season, which premiered on September 25, 2019. In February 2020, the series was renewed for a ninth, tenth and eleventh season.
Filming
The building used in the show for the firehouse exteriors is a working Chicago Fire Department firehouse, and is the headquarters of Engine 18, located at 1360 South Blue Island Avenue at Maxwell Street, between 13th & Racine. Housed here is ALS Engine 18, 2–2–1 (Deputy District Chief – 1st District), 2–1–21 (1st District Chief), 6–4–16 (High-Rise Response Unit), and ALS Ambulance 65.  The interiors of Firehouse 51 are filmed at Cinespace Chicago Film Studios. The station house used for exteriors in Chicago PD is just a few blocks away at 949 West Maxwell Street at Morgan Street (interiors likewise filmed at Cinespace).
Chicago artist and retired firefighter Lee J. Kowalski's oil paintings of fire scenes can be spotted in several episodes.
Molly's, a small bar owned by Herrmann, Dawson and Mouch, was filmed at Lotties in Bucktown. Filming no longer takes place on location to avoid disrupting business. Instead, the interior and exterior surroundings were recreated at Cinespace.
In November 2012, WGN-TV reported a plane crash at 29th and Martin Luther King Drive on their morning newscast and showed live footage for a few minutes before realizing it was merely a set piece pre-staged for Chicago Fire and not an actual emergency situation.
On March 13, 2020, Universal Television shut down production on the series due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Production on the series was temporarily halted on September 14, 2022, after a shooting occurred near the set.
Reception
On Metacritic, the first season has a score of 49 out of 100 based on reviews from 23 critics, indicating "mixed or average reviews".
Spin-offs
On March 27, 2013, NBC announced plans for a proposed spin-off of Chicago Fire, the police procedural drama Chicago P.D. that would involve the Chicago Police Department, the spin-off series being created and produced by Dick Wolf, with Derek Haas, Michael Brandt, and Matt Olmstead serving as executive producers. It premiered on January 8, 2014.
The show follows an Intelligence Unit of the police and is filmed entirely in Chicago. The main cast includes Jason Beghe, Jon Seda, Sophia Bush, Jesse Lee Soffer, Patrick Flueger, Elias Koteas, Marina Squerciati, LaRoyce Hawkins and Archie Kao.
In February 2015, NBC announced plans to make another spin-off, the medical drama Chicago Med. A special backdoor pilot episode of the show aired during Chicago Fire's third season. On May 1, 2015, Chicago Med was officially ordered to a series, starring Oliver Platt, S. Epatha Merkerson, Nick Gehlfuss, Yaya DaCosta, Torrey DeVitto, Rachel DiPillo, Marlyne Barrett, Colin Donnell and Brian Tee. It premiered on November 17, 2015.
Chicago Fire was the first show of what would become the Chicago franchise. Additionally, Chicago P.D. aired a backdoor pilot of the short-lived legal drama series Chicago Justice, which ran from March 1, to May 14, 2017.
Broadcast and streaming
Chicago Fire is broadcast by NBC in the United States. The latest five episodes of Chicago Fire are available on Hulu with a subscription. Season 4 is available on NBC.com and the NBC app with a cable subscription. All episodes are available from electronic sell-through platforms such as iTunes, Amazon Instant Video, and Vudu. The series is available for streaming on Peacock along with Chicago P.D., Chicago Med, Law & Order, Law & Order: Special Victims Unit and Law & Order: Criminal Intent.
In Canada, the series aired on Global for seven seasons, then moved to CityTV.
In Malaysia, the series aired on PRIMEtime for eight seasons, then moved to Universal Channel Asia and AXN asia.
Syndication
Ion Television has acquired the off-network rights to air the series. Episodes began airing in June 2021. MyNetworkTV also acquired the off-network rights to air the series. Episodes began airing in September 2021.