Cia-Cia language
Cia-Cia (Bahasa Ciacia, 바하사 찌아찌아, بهاس چيا-چيا), also known as Buton or Butonese, is an Austronesian language spoken principally around the city of Baubau on the southern tip of Buton Island off the southeast coast of Sulawesi in Indonesia.
In 2009, the language gained international media attention as the city of Baubau was teaching children to read and write Cia-Cia in Hangul, the Korean alphabet, and the mayor consulted the Indonesian government on the possibility of making the writing system official.
However, the project encountered difficulties between the city of Baubau, the Hunminjeongeum Society, and the Seoul Metropolitan Government in 2011. The King Sejong Institute which had been established in Baubau in 2011 to teach Hangul to locals, abandoned its offices after a year of operation in 2012. As of 2017 it remains in use in schools and on local signs. In 2020, the first Cia-Cia dictionary was announced. Written in Hangul, it is set to be published in 2023.
Demographics
As of 2005 there were 80,000 speakers. Speakers also use Wolio, which is closely related to Cia-Cia,  as well as Indonesian, the national language of Indonesia. Wolio is falling into disuse as a written language among the Cia-Cia, as it is written using the Arabic script and Indonesian is now taught in schools with the Latin script.
Geographic distribution
Cia-Cia is spoken in Southeast Sulawesi, south Buton Island, Binongko Island, and Batu Atas Island.
According to legend, Cia-Cia speakers on Binonko descend from Butonese troops sent by a Butonese Sultan.
Name
The name of the language comes from the negator cia "no". It is also known as Buton, Butonese, Butung, and in Dutch Boetonees, names it shares with Wolio, and as South Buton or Southern Butung.
Dialects
The language situation on the island of Buton is very complicated and not known in great detail.
Dialects include Kaesabu, Sampolawa (Mambulu-Laporo), Wabula (with its subvarieties), and Masiri. The Masiri dialect shows the greatest amount of vocabulary in common with the standard dialect. The dialect Pedalaman has gh—equivalent to r in other dialects—in native vocabulary, but has r in loan words.
Orthography
Cia-Cia was once written in a Jawi-like script, called Gundhul, based on Arabic with five additional consonant letters but no signs for vowels.
In 2009, residents of the city of Baubau set about adopting Hangul, the script for the Korean language, as their script for writing Cia-Cia. In January 2020, the publication of the first Cia-Cia dictionary in Hangul was announced. Set to take three years to publish, it is expected to cost ₩15,000,000.
* ᄙ is not a separate letter. The medial /r/ and /l/ are distinguished by writing a single letter (ㄹ) for /r/ and double (ᄙ) for /l/. Double ㄹ must be written in two syllables. The final /l/ is written with a single letter ㄹ; for the final consonant /r/, the null vowel (ㅡ) is added. Null consonant and vowel letters (으) are added for initial /l/.
An example of the Hangul script followed by Latin alphabet and IPA:
아디
Adi
aɗi
세링
sering
seriŋ
빨리
pali
pali
노논또
nononto
nononto
뗄레ᄫᅵ시.
televisi.
teleβisi
아마노
Amano
amano
노뽀옴바에
nopo'ombae
nopoʔomɓa.e
이아
ia
i.a
나누몬또
nanumonto
nanumonto
뗄레ᄫᅵ시
televisi
teleβisi
꼴리에
kolie
koli.e
노몰렝오.
nomolengo.
nomoleŋo
아디 세링 빨리 노논또 뗄레ᄫᅵ시. 아마노 노뽀옴바에 이아 나누몬또 뗄레ᄫᅵ시 꼴리에 노몰렝오.
Adi sering pali nononto televisi. Amano nopo'ombae ia nanumonto televisi kolie nomolengo.
aɗi seriŋ pali nononto teleβisi amano nopoʔomɓa.e i.a nanumonto teleβisi koli.e nomoleŋo
Words
The numerals 1–10 are: