COVID-19 pandemic by country and territory
This is a general overview and status of places affected by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), the virus which causes coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) and is responsible for the COVID-19 pandemic. The first human cases of COVID-19 were identified in Wuhan, the capital of the province of Hubei in China in December 2019.


The figures presented are based on reported cases and deaths. While in several high-income countries the ratio of total estimated cases and deaths to reported cases and deaths is low and close to 1, for some countries it may be more than 10 or even more than 100. Implementation of COVID-19 surveillance methods varies widely.
Maps and timelines
Total cases
World maps showing total confirmed cases, and total confirmed cases per million, by country. Data is from the COVID-19 Data Repository by the Center for Systems Science and Engineering (CSSE) at Johns Hopkins University.
Total deaths
Data is from the COVID-19 Data Repository by the Center for Systems Science and Engineering (CSSE) at Johns Hopkins University.
Daily deaths
Data for the map and graphs is from the COVID-19 Data Repository by the Center for Systems Science and Engineering (CSSE) at Johns Hopkins University. 7-day rolling average.
Weekly deaths
Data for the graph is from the COVID-19 Data Repository by the Center for Systems Science and Engineering (CSSE) at Johns Hopkins University.
Total vaccinations
Data is collated by Our World in Data from figures that are verifiable based on public official sources.
Statistics
Total cases, deaths, and death rates by country
The table was updated automatically on 6 January 2023. Data source is Our World in Data.
All columns are cumulative. "Deaths per million" is the number of deaths per million people.
Logarithmic plot of confirmed cases from Our World in Data
A logarithmic plot of confirmed cases from Our World in Data using roughly the first 12 months of data from the pandemic.
Cumulative monthly death totals by country (World Health Organization)
The 2022 and 2021 tables below contain the cumulative number of monthly deaths from the pandemic of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) reported by each country and territory to the World Health Organization (WHO) and published in the WHO's spreadsheets and tables updated daily. See COVID-19 pandemic deaths for tables for all years, and for world maps and graphs.
Cases and deaths by region
Reporting standards vary enormously in different countries. No statistics are particularly accurate, but case and death rates in India (South Asia) and Sub-Saharan Africa in particular are probably much higher than reported.

Vaccinations
The table was updated automatically on 6 January 2023.
Number and percentage of people who have received at least one dose of a COVID-19 vaccine (unless noted otherwise). May include vaccination of non-citizens, which can push totals beyond 100% of the local population.
By continent
As a result of COVID-19 many regions have imposed lockdowns, curfews, and quarantines alongside new legislation and evacuations, or other restrictions for citizens of or recent travelers to the most affected areas. Other regions have imposed global restrictions that apply to all foreign countries and territories, or prevent their own citizens from travelling overseas.
Africa
The pandemic was confirmed to have spread to Africa on 14 February 2020, with the first confirmed case announced in Egypt. The first confirmed case in sub-Saharan Africa was announced in Nigeria at the end of February 2020. Within three months, the virus had spread throughout the continent, as Lesotho, the last African sovereign state to have remained free of the virus, reported a case on 13 May 2020. By 26 May, it appeared that most African countries were experiencing community transmission, although testing capacity was limited. Most of the identified imported cases arrived from Europe and the United States rather than from China where the virus originated.
The government of Egypt denied January 2021 allegations that the shortage of oxygen had killed several COVID-19 patients at one of its hospitals. However, an investigation led by The New York Times confirmed that the authorities had lied. The video of one of Egypt's hospitals treating critical patients using manual ventilation methods went viral on Facebook. The video was posted by Ahmed Nafei, the nephew of a 62-year-old woman who died. In addition, the relatives of the dead patients and the El Husseineya Central Hospital's medical staff also confirmed in an interview given to The New York Times that the cause of death had been the shortage of oxygen.
Asia
The COVID-19 pandemic began in Asia in Wuhan, Hubei, China, and has spread widely through the continent. As of 6 January 2023, at least one case of COVID-19 had been reported in every country in Asia except Turkmenistan.
The Asian countries with the highest numbers of confirmed coronavirus cases are India, South Korea, Turkey, Vietnam, and Iran. Despite being the first area of the world hit by the outbreak, the early wide-scale response of some Asian states, particularly Bhutan, Singapore, Taiwan, and Vietnam has allowed them to fare comparatively well. China was criticised for initially minimising the severity of the outbreak, but its wide-scale response has largely contained the disease since March 2020.
Europe
The global COVID-19 pandemic arrived in Europe with its first confirmed case in Bordeaux, France, on 24 January 2020, and subsequently spread widely across the continent. By 17 March 2020, every country in Europe had confirmed a case, and all have reported at least one death, with the exception of Vatican City.
North America
The first cases of the COVID-19 pandemic of coronavirus disease 2019 in North America were reported in the United States on 23 January 2020. Cases were reported in all North American countries after Saint Kitts and Nevis confirmed a case on 25 March, and in all North American territories after Bonaire confirmed a case on 16 April.
On 26 March 2020, the United States became the country in North America with the highest number of confirmed COVID-19 infections, at over 82,000 cases. On 11 April 2020, the United States became the country in North America with the highest official death toll for COVID-19, at over 20,000 deaths. As of 10 April 2022, there are about 97 million cases and about 1.4 million deaths in North America; about 88.9 million have recovered from COVID-19, meaning that nearly 11 out of 12 cases have recovered or that the recovery rate is nearly 92%.
As of 10 April 2022, the United States has had the highest number of cases in North America, at about 82 million cases, as well as the highest death toll, at over a million deaths. There have been nearly 75.7 million recoveries in the United States as of 10 April 2022, meaning that nearly 12 out of 13 cases in the country have recovered or that the recovery rate is about 92%. On 20 March 2022, the number of COVID-19 deaths in the United States exceeded a million.
Oceania
The COVID-19 pandemic was confirmed to have reached Oceania on 25 January 2020 with the first confirmed case reported in Melbourne, Australia. The virus has spread to all sovereign states and territories in the region. Australia and New Zealand were praised for their handling of the pandemic in comparison to other Western nations, with New Zealand and each state in Australia wiping out all community transmission of the virus several times even after re-introduction in the community.
South America
The pandemic was confirmed to have reached South America on 26 February 2020 when Brazil confirmed a case in São Paulo. By 3 April, all countries and territories in South America had recorded at least one case.
On 13 May 2020, it was reported that Latin America and the Caribbean had reported over 400,000 cases of COVID-19 infection with, 23,091 deaths. On 22 May 2020, citing the rapid increase of infections in Brazil, the WHO declared South America the epicentre of the pandemic.
At sea
Early in 2020, in the early days of the COVID-19 pandemic, the disease spread to a number of cruise ships, with the nature of such ships – including crowded semi-enclosed areas, increased exposure to new environments, and limited medical resources – contributing to the heightened risk and rapid spread of the disease.
The COVID-19 pandemic spread to many military ships. The nature of these ships, which includes working with others in small enclosed areas and a lack of private quarters for the vast majority of crew, contributed to the rapid spread of the disease, even more so than on cruise ships.
Timeline of first confirmed cases by country or territory
Country with no confirmed cases
As of 6 December 2022, Turkmenistan in Central Asia is the only sovereign state in the world which has not reported any confirmed cases of COVID-19.
See also
Notes