Darrell K Royal–Texas Memorial Stadium
Darrell K Royal Memorial Stadium (formerly War Memorial Stadium, Memorial Stadium, and Texas Memorial Stadium), located in Austin, Texas, on the campus of the University of Texas, has been home to the Longhorns football team since 1924.  The stadium has delivered a home field advantage with the team's home record through November 17, 2018 being 375–117–10 (.764).  The official stadium seating capacity is 100,119, making the stadium the largest in the Big 12 Conference, the seventh largest stadium in the United States, and the ninth largest stadium in the world.
The DKR–Texas Memorial Stadium attendance record of 105,213 spectators was set on September 10, 2022, when Texas played The University of Alabama (Texas 19–20 loss).
History
Memorial dedication
In 1923, former UT athletics director L. Theo Bellmont (the west side of the stadium is named in his honor), along with 30 student leaders, presented the idea to the Board of Regents of building a concrete stadium to replace the wooden bleachers of Clark Field. Heralded as "the largest sports facility of its kind in the Southwest" upon its completion in 1924, it seated 27,000 people in the lower level of the current facility's east and west grandstands. It was designed as a dual-purpose facility with a 440-yard (400 m) athletics track surrounding the football field. The stadium was financed through donations from both students and alumni. The estimated cost of the structure was $275,000.
The student body dedicated the stadium in honor of the 198,520 Texans—5,280 of whom died—who fought in World War I. A statue, representing the figure of democracy, was later placed atop the north end zone seats of the stadium. In World War II, the university lost many former players, including former coach Jack Chevigny. The Athletics Council rededicated the newly enlarged stadium on September 18, 1948, prior to the Texas-LSU game, honoring the men and women who had died in the war. On November 12, 1977, a small granite monument was unveiled and placed at the base of the statue, during the TCU-Texas game. The ceremony rededicated Texas Memorial Stadium to the memory of all alumni in all American wars.
The University of Texas honored legendary football coach Darrell K Royal, who enlisted in the US Army Air Corps in 1943, played at the University of Oklahoma under legendary Coach Bud Wilkinson, and who led Texas to three national championships and eleven Southwest Conference titles, by officially naming the stadium after him in 1996. Additionally, the university established the Royal-Texas Memorial Stadium Veterans Committee, composed of alumni who served in World War II, Korea, Vietnam, or the Gulf Wars. The committee is charged to forever dedicate the stadium in the memory of, and in honor of, UT students and alumni who gave their lives for their country. Each year, one home football game is designated as Veterans Recognition Day, commemorating the memorial aspect of the stadium and to honor the memory of war soldiers.
Renovations and expansions
The stadium has been expanded several times since its original opening.
History of capacity changes