David Platt
David Andrew Platt (born 10 June 1966) is an English former professional football coach and player, who played as a midfielder.
Born in Chadderton, Lancashire, Platt began his career as an apprentice at Manchester United before moving to Crewe Alexandra, where he began building a reputation as a goal-scoring midfielder. At the age of 22, he signed for Aston Villa and gained the attention of the England manager Bobby Robson, with whom he soon made his debut. At the 1990 World Cup, Platt increased his reputation with impressive performances, and by scoring goals with his head and feet. According to Rob Bagchi in The Guardian, Platt "seized Bryan Robson's role with riveting aplomb." His performances in the World Cup earned him a move to Serie A club Bari in 1991.
In 1992, Platt moved to Juventus, where he spent one season. Platt continued scoring goals for England, playing in Euro 92 and 96. (England failed to qualify for the 1994 FIFA World Cup.) In 1993, he moved to Sampdoria where he stayed for two seasons before he returned to England to join Arsenal. Platt was at the London club for three years, featuring in the Arsenal side that won the Premier League and FA Cup Double in 1998. 
Platt went on to manage Sampdoria and Nottingham Forest, as well as England's Under-21 team. He later became a coach with Manchester City.
Club career
Manchester United and Crewe Alexandra
Platt signed for Manchester United as an apprentice on leaving school in 1982, having been spotted playing for Chadderton. He accepted manager Ron Atkinson's offer of a professional contract at the start of the 1984–85 season, but was given a free transfer on 23 February 1985 without ever playing for the Manchester United first team.
Dario Gradi then signed Platt for Crewe Alexandra in the Fourth Division. He quickly established himself in the first team at Gresty Road as a strong-running, free-scoring midfielder. He played 156 games in the Fourth Division, and scored 56 goals, over the next three years. In the FA Cup he played three games, scoring one goal. In the League Cup he played four games, scoring four goals.
Aston Villa
In February 1988, Platt left Crewe - still a Fourth Division side - to join Aston Villa for £200,000 and helped his new club earn an instant return to the First Division that season, as runners-up in the Second Division.
He was a frequent goalscorer for Villa, helping re-establish them in the First Division at the end of the 1980s, and in 1989–90 took them to the brink of the league title. Although they had to settle for runners-up spot behind Liverpool, Platt was voted PFA Players' Player of the Year.
The next season, 1990–91, he continued where he left off. In a game against Arsenal he famously went in goal when Nigel Spink was injured in a 5–0 defeat to Arsenal.
Platt's success with Villa was evident in his goal-scoring record. In more than three years at Villa Park, he played 121 League games, scoring 50 goals. In the FA Cup he scored two goals in four games, while in the League Cup he scored 10 goals in 14 games. However, his final season at Villa saw the club finish a disappointing 17th in the league, and he was already being linked with a move to Italy.
Bari
On 21 July 1991, Platt moved to Italy to play in Serie A. He signed for A.S. Bari for £5.5 million and played 29 games in his first season, scoring 11 goals. In the Italian league, where goals were difficult to come by owing to the more defensive tactics adopted by most clubs, particularly for a midfielder, this was considered an impressive achievement. Unfortunately, the 1991–92 Serie A season ended in relegation for Platt and Bari.
During his time at Bari, Platt received a phone call from Roberto Mancini in January 1992, who pressed him to come to Sampdoria. Almost from the moment Platt – the 1990 PFA Players' Player of the Year at Aston Villa and one of Bobby Robson's shining lights at the World Cup finals of the same year – left England in a transfer-record move to Serie A club Bari, Mancini saw the asset he would be at Sampdoria, where the Italian was captain. Platt's first telephone call from Mancini came as a surprise in January 1992. "We'd played Sampdoria a few times and I'd faced Robbie," Platt recalls. "But I didn't know him and he'd tracked my number from somewhere. He said: 'I know you've got a good relationship with your president, I'm sure you could push through a move to us.'" In the end, Platt chose Juventus.
Juventus
In June 1992, Platt was signed for Juventus for £6.5 million. In domestic competitions Platt struggled to maintain a first-team place in the Juventus team that season, which possessed many stars. He did score a decisive goal against S.S.C. Napoli in a 4–3 victory, giving the team a chance at the league title.
He also helped the Turin club win the UEFA Cup. Platt was involved in five matches—one as an unused substitute. Platt scored the decisive goal away to Panathinaikos as Juventus won the second round match 1–0 on aggregate. He played in both semi-final legs against Paris Saint Germain.


Platt wasn't listed on the substitutes bench, however he picked up a medal as part of the squad and lifted the trophy after the final. In Serie A, he scored three goals in 16 games.
Mancini persisted despite his move to Turin. "Every two weeks he would be on the phone, pressing me." When things quickly failed to work out in Turin, the move Mancini wanted finally did happen. "Juventus played Sampdoria, Robbie was playing, so I was marking him and hovering around him, hoping he would say something," Platt remembers. "I've always suspected I wasn't on Sampdoria's list that summer, because their president wanted to sign Marco Osio from Parma but he ran the transfer list past Robbie, who had much of the say. I soon made the move."
Sampdoria
After just one season with Juventus, Platt was soon on the move again. This time he signed for Sampdoria on 14 July 1993 for £5.2 million. Platt won the Coppa Italia (Italian Cup) in 1994 under Swedish coach Sven-Göran Eriksson. By the time his Italian career came to a close, he was a technically experienced player, possessing dribbling, passing and finishing skills equal to the best. Platt played for exactly two years, until 14 July 1995. He played 55 League games for Sampdoria, scoring 17 goals.
Arsenal
After four years in Italy with three different clubs, Platt returned to England on 10 July 1995 when new Arsenal manager Bruce Rioch signed him for £4.75 million. Rioch cut short a holiday in Portugal to bring Platt to Arsenal. Platt had been offered a two-year extension to his contract with Sampdoria, but his mind was soon made up after talking to Rioch in Sardinia where he was on holiday. "Arsenal made it clear that they really wanted me," Platt said. "My talks with Bruce Rioch were exceptional. We hit it off straight away. He is a great communicator with some exciting ideas on tactics and a definite view on how he sees me fitting into his plans." The feelings were mutual. "I'm delighted to sign a player of David's calibre," Rioch said. "I have admired him for a long time and through these discussions with him I have been very impressed by his knowledge, ambition and desire."
In his first season, Arsenal finished fifth in the league and qualified for the UEFA Cup, although Rioch was sacked just before the start of the following season due to a dispute with the board, and succeeded by Frenchman Arsène Wenger. His first season at Highbury produced six goals from his 29 league appearances, with his first goal in an Arsenal shirt coming in a 2–0 win at Everton in the second game of the campaign. Platt was a regular in Wenger's first season, in the 1996–97 season, with the North Londoners and scored four goals in 28 league appearances, mainly alongside new signing Patrick Vieira in the centre of the Arsenal midfield. Arsenal were top of the table in late autumn, but eventually had to settle for a third place finish, seven points behind champions Manchester United.
Wenger boosted his midfield department during the summer of 1997 with the arrival of French pair Emmanuel Petit and Gilles Grimandi. The manager's preferred central-midfield pairing was Petit and Vieira, who played a crucial role in Arsenal's double winning campaign. This severely limited Platt's appearances and he was to make just 11 starts during the season, with a further 20 substitute appearances. He still managed to make a vital contribution to Arsenal's season, however, with a superb headed winner in a 3–2 victory over Manchester United at Highbury. That proved to be Platt's last season with the Gunners as he retired from playing at the end of the season, with the intention of taking a year out from the game to study coaching before making the move into management. His last match was the 1998 FA Cup Final.
Early in the 1997–98 season, Arsenal accepted a £1.5million bid from Middlesbrough for Platt, but the transfer never happened and Platt saw out the season at Highbury.
Nottingham Forest
In July 1999, David Platt signed a three-year contract to take over at Nottingham Forest as player-manager, which saw him go back on his decision from a year earlier to retire from playing.
International career
1990 World Cup
Platt was given his first England cap by Bobby Robson in a friendly against Italy in November 1989, and was then included in the England squad when Robson named his 22-player squad for the 1990 World Cup.
England had been drawn in Group F with Ireland, the Netherlands and Egypt. Platt came on as a substitute against the Irish and the Dutch but remained on the bench for the game against Egypt. England won the group after a 1–1 draw with Ireland, a 0–0 draw with the Dutch (in which England had two goals disallowed from Stuart Pearce and Gary Lineker) and a 1–0 win against Egypt. England qualified for the 1990 FIFA World Cup knockout stage and were drawn against Belgium. The Belgians dominated the game, hitting the post twice through Enzo Scifo. John Barnes had a goal wrongly disallowed for offside and the game ended 0–0. Platt was sent on as an extra time substitute. In the 120th minute, he scored a memorable volley on the turn from a Paul Gascoigne free-kick, his first goal for his country. Afterwards, and in reflection he said,
With captain Bryan Robson having suffered an injury against the Netherlands, Platt started the next game - a quarter-final against Cameroon. He scored the opening goal from a header after a cross from Stuart Pearce on 25 minutes. Cameroon took a 2–1 lead but were beaten 3–2 after extra-time. Platt missed an opportunity to extend England's lead, shooting wide with seconds remaining.
Platt kept his place in the semi-final against West Germany. It finished 1–1 and extra-time was needed. Platt had a headed goal disallowed in extra time. The game was drawn and went to a penalty shootout. He scored England's third penalty, despite Bodo Illgner, the German goalkeeper, getting a hand to the ball. The next two were not converted and England went out of the tournament.
Platt ended the competition on a high by scoring his third goal of the finals in a 2–1 defeat by Italy in the third-place play-off. Roberto Baggio had given the Italians the lead after a mistake by Peter Shilton. On 81 minutes, Tony Dorigo crossed for Platt to place a powerful header into the corner of the Italian net, past Walter Zenga. Italy won the game when Paul Parker fouled Salvatore Schillaci. Schillaci scored the penalty kick. After the World Cup he retained his starting place in the England team, now managed by Graham Taylor, his former manager at Villa.
Euro 1992
Platt became arguably England's most consistent performer of the early 1990s, scoring goals with frequency from midfield and proving an inspirational leader. He was captain for much of this period, though Tony Adams also skippered the side. The official England history regards him as a tireless runner and tidy passer, leading by quiet example and providing inspiration at a time when it was a rare commodity. At one point, it said: "It seemed as if he had been granted the copyright on England goals".
For the UEFA Euro 1992 qualifying, England were drawn in UEFA Euro 1992 qualifying Group 7 with Ireland, Turkey and Poland. Platt contributed one goal to the qualifying phase, in a 1–1 away draw with the Irish. It was decisive, as England won the group by a single point, eliminating the other three nations. Platt also scored several goals in friendly games. He liked to run from deep midfield positions, arriving late into the penalty area to pick up upon a pass. It made it difficult for defenders to pick him up. He scored two goals against the USSR and one against Argentina during the 1991 England Challenge Cup, which England won. Platt also scored against Brazil, and claimed another two against Finland in the lead-up to the tournament.
At Euro 1992 tournament, England were drawn in UEFA Euro 1992 Group 1 with Sweden, France and Denmark. In the opening game Platt missed several chances to win the game for England. After only 12 minutes, Peter Schmeichel saved a shot at point-blank range, with which Platt was unable to connect properly. The game ended 0–0. In the match against France, Platt nearly scored with a diving header that went inches wide of the post. The game ended 0–0. England needed to beat hosts Sweden to advance to the semi-finals. Lineker crossed for Platt to open the scoring on four minutes with a miskicked volley. However, England wasted several chances to extend their lead. Platt passed to Tony Daley, who wasted a chance to pass to Lineker in the open. England held a slender 1–0 lead at half-time. After half-time, the Swedes changed their personnel and formation and dominated the second half, scoring twice to win 2–1. England were eliminated.
1994 World Cup Qualifying
England were drawn in 1994 FIFA World Cup qualification (UEFA – Group 2) for the 1994 FIFA World Cup qualification (UEFA), along with Poland, Turkey, San Marino, the Netherlands and Norway.
The qualifiers began at home to Norway. England dominated the game and Platt carried the goal threat, with Alan Shearer and Ian Wright struggling to find form. He scored the opening goal after an hour. England dominated the remainder of the game and were unlucky to concede to a long-range shot from Kjetil Rekdal. Platt continued his drive from midfield in wins over Turkey at home (4-0) and San Marino (6-0). Platt scored four goals and missed a penalty against the Sammarinese. Platt also scored in 2–0 away win against Turkey. John Barnes crossed from a free-kick for Platt to score with a headed goal. England's campaign seemed to be getting back on track.
In a crucial home game against the Netherlands, Platt scored the second goal to put England 2–0 up against the Dutch. A defeat would have ended Dutch hopes of qualification after a home draw against Poland and a defeat away to Norway. However, Dennis Bergkamp pulled a goal back before the break. England still controlled the match, but the Dutch scored a penalty four minutes from time for a 2–2 draw. In general, the team struggled to find form in the spring and summer of 1993. England drew 1–1 in Poland, with their opponents missing several glaring chances. Days later, England lost 2–0 to Norway in Oslo. Platt miscontrolled a pass from Gascoigne that would have put him one-on-one with the goalkeeper Erik Thorstvedt, which, had he scored, would have given England the lead. Thereafter, the Norwegians outplayed the English, and Platt had few chances to make a difference.
In the summer, Platt travelled to America with England to take part in the 1993 U.S. Cup, which was supposed to give England crucial experience in American conditions. Platt missed the "humiliating" 2–0 loss to the United States through injury. In the second game, he came off the bench to score with his first touch against Brazil, giving England the lead. The game ended 1–1. Platt scored in the final game against Germany, equalising via a well-worked passing move with Paul Ince that allowed Platt to tap into an empty net. England lost 2–1.
At the start of the next season England improved, with a 3–0 home win against Poland in which Platt played a part. With two games left, Norway had won the group, leaving England and the Dutch scrapping for second place. Level with the Dutch on points, England would have been satisfied with a draw, as long as they could record a big away win against San Marino. The game was played at a furious pace. Both sides had chances and Platt went close to scoring from a corner. With an hour gone, the score was 0–0. Andy Sinton played a through ball that allowed Platt a clear run on goal. Ronald Koeman fouled him just outside the area. The referee failed to send off Koeman. The Dutchman opened the scoring minutes later with a free-kick and England lost the game. England won in San Marino 7–1, without Platt scoring, but the team finished third in the group and were eliminated. Taylor was sacked. Platt had scored 7 of the 29 goals scored by England in the failed campaign.
Euro 1996
Graham Taylor's replacement, Terry Venables, kept Platt in his squads. Platt scored the first England goal in the Venables era in March 1994 against Denmark, and also netted against Greece and Nigeria. However, a series of rivals arrived to displace him in the England team. He was not helped by a string of injuries to his left knee that reduced his effectiveness as a tireless midfielder. Players like Steve McManaman and Darren Anderton emerged, and Venables decided to employ Paul Ince and Gascoigne in central midfield by the time Euro 1996 came round. Platt had to settle for a place on the bench. In the warm-up game against Hungary, he scored his 27th and final goal for his country. This made him the second-highest-scoring midfielder in the history of the England team. Platt's goal tally was subsequently surpassed by Frank Lampard.
Platt appeared as a substitute in most of the Euro 1996 games and started the quarter-final against Spain as Ince was suspended. In the semi-final against Germany he started, playing 120 minutes. In the second minute of extra-time, he sent McManaman through on the right side of midfield and he delivered a cross to Anderton, who hit the post. Had it gone in, the golden goal rule would have seen England in the final. The match ended 1–1 at the end of extra time and, once again, penalties decided the winner. As in 1990, Platt scored in a penalty shoot-out against Germany but similarly ended up on the losing side. Platt retired from international football soon afterwards, having been capped 62 times and scored 27 goals. 55 appearances were made as a starting player, and seven as substitute.
Managing and media career
Within months of leaving Arsenal, Platt returned to Sampdoria as manager, a controversial stint which ended prematurely, with other clubs protesting that Platt did not have the appropriate coaching qualifications for managing in Serie A. Platt resigned before Sampdoria were relegated to Serie B.
In July 1999, Platt was appointed manager of Nottingham Forest, who had just been relegated from the Premier League. He actually made a playing comeback in the 1999–2000 season, playing three Division One games, and scoring once against Crystal Palace at the start of the following season.
He was manager at the City Ground for two seasons, but had little success despite spending several million pounds on players who did not perform well and plunging the club into large sums of debt. Platt's tenure at Forest was marred by disagreements with several experienced, long-serving players, leading to them being isolated from the first-team picture and subsequently released by the club. He is still hugely unpopular with many Forest fans who blame him for the club's decline on and off the field during the 2000s, which culminated in relegation to the league's third tier four years after his departure.
Platt was appointed manager of the England U21 on 17 July 2001, which brought a little more success than his stint at Forest. He guided them to qualification for the U-21 European Championships in 2002. He left this role after failing to qualify for the 2004 tournament and was succeeded by Peter Taylor. Platt is now seen as a media pundit often for England U21 matches.
On 1 July 2010, Platt was hired as first team coach at Manchester City alongside manager (and former teammate) Roberto Mancini, a decision that was not well received by many City fans because of his perceived anti-City stance as a pundit.
He has previously written a regular column for FourFourTwo magazine, commenting on tactics.
On 14 May 2013, Platt left his assistant manager role at Manchester City following the departure of the manager Roberto Mancini.
Pune City
On 27 May 2015, Platt was announced as the head coach of FC Pune City of the Indian Super League. After one season, Platt was confirmed to not be returning to the Indian club for 2016.
Palermo
On 3 December 2018, he was appointed as a club consultant for U.S. Città di Palermo of Italy's Serie B following the club takeover by an English group.
Personal life
Platt is fluent in Italian owing to his time playing there.
He is married to Rachel and has a son, Charlie, who was born in 2006.
In 1993, he shared the cover of FIFA International Soccer with Piotr Świerczewski, in the first game in this videogame series.
Career statistics
International
Honours
Aston Villa
Juventus
Sampdoria
Arsenal
Individual