Dawn (newspaper)
Dawn is a Pakistani English-language newspaper that was launched in British India in 1941. It is the largest English newspaper in Pakistan, and also serves as the country's newspaper of record. Dawn is the flagship publication of the Dawn Media Group, which also owns local radio station CityFM89 as well as the marketing and media magazine Aurora.


Muhammad Ali Jinnah, Pakistan's founding father, launched the newspaper in Delhi on 26 October 1941, with the goal of establishing it as a mouthpiece for the All-India Muslim League. The first issue was printed at Latifi Press on 12 October 1942. Based in Karachi, it also maintains offices in Lahore and the capital city of Islamabad, in addition to having correspondents abroad. As of 2010, it has a weekday circulation of over 109,000. The newspaper's current chief editor is Zaffar Abbas.
History
Dawn began as a weekly publication, based in New Delhi. Under the instruction of Jinnah, it became the official organ of the All India Muslim League in Delhi, and the sole voice of the Muslims League in the English language, reflecting and espousing the cause of Pakistan's creation. Jinnah summed up the paper's purpose in these words:
Dawn became a daily newspaper in October 1944 under the leadership of its editor, Pothan Joseph, who later resigned in 1944 to take up the position of the government's principal information officer in part because of differences with Jinnah over the Pakistan Movement. He was succeeded by Altaf Husain who galvanized the Muslims of India for independence by his editorials, which earned him the ire of the Congress Party and of Lord Mountbatten, the last Viceroy and Governor-General of the British Raj both of whom wanted a united India.
In 1947, senior Dawn staff led by Altaf Husain moved to Karachi. So, Karachi became the head office of the newspaper.
In 1950, for a brief period, the owners discontinued Dawn over ownership issues and restarted it as Herald.
Features
Dawn regularly carries syndicated articles from western newspapers such as The Independent, The Guardian, the Los Angeles Times and The Washington Post.
On Sundays, the weekend advertiser carries three sections namely "Ad Buzz", "Career", and "Real Estate".
Editors
Controversies
Relations with WikiLeaks
On 19 May 2011, Dawn Media Group signed a memorandum of understanding with Julian Assange, founder of WikiLeaks, for the exclusive first use in Pakistan of all the secret US diplomatic cables related to political and other developments in the country.
An announcement printed in the newspaper and posted on the website read:
Leak controversy
In 2016, a story, "Act against militants or face international isolation, civilians tell military" by Cyril Almeida, Oxford-educated assistant editor and columnist for Dawn, triggered the resignation of Information Minister Pervaiz Rashid, after a preliminary investigation established a "lapse" on his part vis-à-vis the publication of the "planted" story.