Demographics of Mongolia
This is a demography of Mongolia including population density, ethnicity, education level, health of the populace, economic status, religious affiliations and other aspects of the population.
Segments
Youth
Youth in Mongolia constituted 18.7% of the population in 2014, numbering roughly 552,000 individuals. The 15–19 age group is the largest in Mongolia; in 2009 about 40% of the population was under 19 years old. Estimated population growth rates as of 2014 were reported as increasing by 1.37%. The steady increase in youth will enlarge the already large proportion of working-aged individuals and create new opportunities to build human capital and facilitate economic development.
In order to address Mongolia's economic future, Mongolia's Parliament adopted the State Population Development Policy in 2004 to confront development issues facing Mongolian youth. This policy and the Mongolia National Programme on Adolescents and Youth Development defined youth as those from ages 15 to 34 years and aims to provide opportunities and services that build youth into well developed citizens. Mongolia is in the process of transitioning from its status as a developing country to a nation with a developing economy. According to the Human Development Index, conditions in Mongolia have been improving in recent years, but its ranking on the Human Poverty Index has dropped further due to the privatization of the economic sector.
Vital statistics
Life expectancy
Source: UN World Population Prospects
Ethnicity and languages
The demonym for the people of Mongolia is Mongolian. The name Mongol usually accounts for people of the Mongol ethnic group, thus excluding Turkic groups such as Kazakhs and Tuvans.
Ethnic Mongols account for about 96% of the population and consist of Khalkh and other groups, all distinguished primarily by dialects of the Mongolian language. The Khalkhs make up 86% of the ethnic Mongol population. The remaining 14% include Oirats, Buryats and others. Ethnic distinctions among the Mongol subgroups are relatively minor.  Language or tribal differences are not a political or social issue.
Significant ethnic Turkic speaker Kazakhs constitute 3.9% of Mongolia's population. Khotons and Chantuu are Mongolized people with Turkic origin and speak in Mongolian.
In around 1860, part of the Middle jüz Kazakhs who sought refuge from Qing Empire massacre in Xinjiang came to Mongolia and were allowed to settle down in Bayan-Ölgii Province. There are smaller numbers of Russian, Chinese, Korean and American people working in Mongolia since 1990. 3,000 Westerners live in Mongolia, accounting for 0.1% of its total population.
English is the most widely used foreign language followed by Russian. Lately, Chinese, Japanese, Korean and German are gaining popularity.
Ethnicity
Literacy
Literacy rate is the percentage of people over the age of 15 who can read and write.
Total population: 98.3%
After a decline in enrollment ratios during the transition to a market economy in the 1990s, school attendance is now once more near-universal: primary school attendance rate is estimated at 97%, and adult literacy at 98%.
Religions
Various forms of Shamanism have been widely practiced throughout the history of what is now Mongolia, as such beliefs were common among nomadic people in Asian history. Such beliefs gradually gave way to Tibetan Buddhism, but shamanism has left a mark on Mongolian religious culture, and continues to be practiced.
Traditionally, Tibetan Buddhism was the predominant religion. However, it was suppressed under the communist regime until 1990, with only one showcase monastery allowed to remain. Since 1990, as liberalization began, Buddhism has encountered a resurgence.
Urbanization
Life in sparsely populated Mongolia has become more urbanized. Nearly half of the people live in the capital, Ulaanbaatar, and in other provincial centers. Semi nomadic life still predominates in the countryside, but settled agricultural communities are becoming more common. Mongolia's population growth rate is estimated at 1.6% (2020 census). About two-thirds of the total population is under age 30, 36% of whom are under 14.
Key: For population growth 1979 - 2008
* - city proper, Nalaikh, Baganuur, Bagakhangai not included in this figure, they are separated in the table.
From List of cities in Mongolia