Double-double
In basketball, a double-double is a single-game performance in which a player accumulates ten or more in two of the following five statistical categories: points, rebounds, assists, steals, and blocked shots. The first "double" in the term refers to the two (double) categories and the second "double" refers to accumulating ten or more (typically double digits) in that category. Similarly, a player records a triple-double, quadruple-double, and quintuple-double when accumulating ten or more in three, four, or all five of the statistical categories, respectively. While double-doubles and triple-doubles occur regularly each NBA season, only four quadruple-doubles have ever officially been recorded in the NBA, and no quintuple-double has ever been recorded in a professional basketball game. A similar term, the five-by-five, is the accumulation of at least five in all five statistical categories. It is rarely done.
Double-double
A double-double is a performance in which a player accumulates a double-digit total in two of five statistical categories—points, rebounds, assists, steals, and blocked shots—in a game. The most common double-double combination is points and rebounds, followed by points and assists. During the 2008–09 NBA season, 69 players who were eligible for leadership in the main statistical categories recorded at least ten double-doubles during the season.
Since the 1983–84 season, Tim Duncan leads the National Basketball Association (NBA) in the points–rebounds combination with 841 double-doubles, John Stockton leads the points–assists combination with 714, and Russell Westbrook leads the rebounds–assists combinations with 142. Since the 1983–84 season, Tim Duncan also holds the record for most total career double-doubles in the NBA, having recorded 841. In league history, the record for most career double-doubles is 968, held by Wilt Chamberlain.
Special double-doubles are rare. One such achievement is sometimes called a 20–20, double double-double, or double-20, when a player accumulates 20 or more in two statistics in a game. Another similar feat is a 30–30. The only player in NBA history to record a 40–40 is Wilt Chamberlain, who achieved the feat eight times in his career, four of which were in his rookie season.
Triple-double
A triple-double is a single-game performance by a player who accumulates a double-digit number total in three of five statistical categories—points, rebounds, assists, steals, and blocked shots—in a game. The most common way for a player to achieve a triple-double is with points, rebounds, and assists, though on occasion players may record 10 or more steals or blocked shots in a game. The origin of the term "triple-double" is unclear. Some sources claim that it was coined in the NBA by former Los Angeles Lakers public relations director Bruce Jolesch in the 1980s in order to showcase Magic Johnson's versatility, while others claim that it was coined by then Philadelphia 76ers media relations director Harvey Pollack in 1980.
Triple-doubles in the NBA
The triple-double became an officially recorded statistic in the NBA during the 1979–80 season. That season, there were 32 triple-doubles, 12 more than the previous season. From the 1979–80 to the 1990–91 season, the NBA recorded a total of 543 triple-doubles, or 45.25 triple-doubles per season. This can be largely attributed to Magic Johnson, who was responsible for 137 of this time-span's triple-doubles, or about 25.23% of them. After Johnson retired in 1991, the number of triple-doubles in the league declined. From the 1991–92 to the 2014–15 seasons, there were only 841 triple-doubles, or about 35.04 triple-doubles per season. Jason Kidd recorded the most triple-doubles in this timespan with 107, which was 68 more than second placed LeBron James. However, in the 2015–16 season, the number of triple-doubles recorded in the NBA grew from 46 to 75. From the 2016–17 to the 2018–19 season, the NBA recorded 352 triple doubles, which was approximately 117.33 triple-doubles per season. Over those three years, Russell Westbrook recorded 101 triple-doubles—28.69% of all triple-doubles in that timespan.
There has been occasional controversy surrounding triple-doubles made when a player achieves the feat with a late rebound. Players with nine rebounds in a game have sometimes been accused of deliberately missing a shot late in the game in order to recover the rebound. One such case involved a player shooting at the opposing team's basket. On March 16, 2003, the Cleveland Cavaliers were up 120–95 against the Utah Jazz with four seconds left in the fourth quarter. Following an inbounded ball, Cavaliers guard Ricky Davis shot the ball off the opposing team's basket to secure the final rebound for a triple double.Ricky Davis Failed Triple-Double Attempt - 3/16/03 (Television production). The move was criticized by players, coaches, and the media. To deter this, NBA rules allow rebounds to be nullified if the shot is determined not to be a legitimate scoring attempt.
Russell Westbrook holds the NBA record for career triple-doubles with 196. He and Oscar Robertson are the only two players to average a triple-double over a season, with Robertson achieving the feat once and Westbrook achieving the feat four times.
Triple-double leaders
The following is a list of triple-double leaders:
Progressive list of triple-double leaders
This is a progressive list of triple-double leaders showing how the record increased through the years.
Facts
WNBA
Triple-doubles have been far more rare in the WNBA than in the NBA; the games are shorter in the WNBA (40 minutes vs 48), there are fewer teams and fewer games in a season (36 vs 82), and the playing style in the WNBA is more of a team game than relying on star players. As of the 2022 season, 20 triple-doubles have been recorded in the WNBA — 16 in the regular season and four in the playoffs. Sheryl Swoopes, and Courtney Vandersloot are tied for third place with two WNBA triple-doubles, while Candace Parker and Sabrina Ionescu are tied for second place with three, and Alyssa Thomas has the all-time record at four.
On June 12, 2022 in a New York Liberty game, Ionescu became the fourth and youngest WNBA player to achieve multiple triple doubles in a career, while also being the first to both achieve a triple double in three quarters and register at least 12 of each statistic for the triple double.
With her third triple double on June 23, 2022, Parker became both the first person to reach three triple doubles overall, as well as achieve two or more triple doubles in the same season.
Alyssa Thomas scored the third overall playoff triple-double and first WNBA Finals triple-double on September 15, 2022 against the Las Vegas Aces, and the fourth the following game on September 18. Thomas recorded all four of her career triple-doubles in the 2022 season.
The following is a list of all WNBA triple-doubles, with the playoff triple-doubles highlighted in italics. Bold numbers indicate the statistic relevant to the triple double.
NCAA Division I
FIBA European Champions Cup and EuroLeague
Much like the WNBA, there are a few reasons why triple-doubles are far more rare in the EuroLeague than in the NBA. The games are 40 minutes long—8 minutes shorter than in the NBA—there are 30 games in a season compared to the NBA's 82, and various rules—such as those on assists—are stricter than that of the NBA. As of 2019, only seven triple-doubles have been recorded in Euroleague history, and only three in the modern era of Euroleague basketball (since 2000). The following is a list of all seven of these triple-doubles:
Quadruple-double
A quadruple-double is a single-game performance by a player who accumulates ten or more in four of five statistical categories—points, rebounds, assists, steals, and blocked shots—in a game. This feat is extremely rare: only four players have officially recorded a quadruple-double in National Basketball Association (NBA) history. The first American male player above the high school level to officially record a quadruple-double was Nate Thurmond, who achieved this feat in 1974 while playing for the NBA's Chicago Bulls. The first American female player above the high school level to officially record a quadruple-double was Ann Meyers, who achieved this feat in 1978 while playing for the UCLA Bruins, when women's college sports were under the auspices of the AIAW.
The first male player in NCAA Division I history to record a quadruple-double was Lester Hudson in 2007. The first Division I women's player to have officially recorded a quadruple-double since the NCAA began sponsoring women's sports in 1981–82 was Veronica Pettry of Loyola–Chicago in 1989. Only three other women have done so since, and the only player to have recorded a quadruple-double since 1993 is Shakyla Hill of Grambling State, who accomplished the feat in 2018 and 2019. An earlier player, Jackie Spencer of Louisville, accomplished the feat against Cincinnati during the 1984–85 season, but the NCAA did not record assists and steals throughout Division I women's basketball at that time. The Metro Conference, then home to both schools, did officially record these statistics, but the NCAA did not start doing so until 1985–86 for assists and 1987–88 for steals.
NBA
Quadruple-doubles have only been possible since the 1973–74 season, when the NBA started recording both blocked shots and steals. It is often speculated by observers that other all-time greats, namely Oscar Robertson (former all time triple-doubles leader with 181, now Russell Westbrook), Wilt Chamberlain, Bill Russell, and Jerry West could conceivably have had quadruple-doubles. West's biography at NBA.com claims that he once recorded an unofficial quadruple-double with 44 points, 12 rebounds, ten assists, and ten blocks. A biography of Wilt Chamberlain claims that he also recorded an unofficial quadruple-double in Game 1 of the 1967 Eastern Division Finals against the Boston Celtics, when he had 24 points, 32 rebounds, 13 assists, and 12 blocks.
The four players listed below are the only players who have officially recorded a quadruple-double in an NBA game. Except for Thurmond, who retired before the award was established in 1983, all of them have won NBA Defensive Player of the Year at least once. Robertson is the only player who was not a center to accomplish the feat, doing so with steals rather than blocks.
Only seven other players (Drexler did it twice) have managed to finish with triple-doubles and a total of 9 in a fourth statistical category (statistical categories in which they fell short are in bold):
Notes
Other men's basketball
Notes
Women's basketball
Quintuple-double
A quintuple-double is a single-game performance by a player who accumulates a double-digits in all five statistical categories—points, rebounds, assists, steals, and blocked shots—in a single game. There are only three known officially recorded quintuple-doubles, all done at the girls' high-school level. The first was recorded by Tamika Catchings of Duncanville High School (Duncanville, Texas) with 25 points, 18 rebounds, 11 assists, 10 steals, and 10 blocks in 1997. The second was by Alex Montgomery of Lincoln High School (Tacoma, Washington), who had 27 points, 22 rebounds, 10 assists, 10 steals, and 10 blocks in January 2007. The third was by Aimee Oertner of Northern Lehigh High School (Slatington, Pennsylvania), who had 26 points, 20 rebounds, 10 assists, 10 steals, and 11 blocks on January 7, 2012.
Wilt Chamberlain allegedly recorded a quintuple-double on March 18, 1968 with 53 points, 32 rebounds, 14 assists, 24 blocks, and 11 steals. However, before 1974, prior to Chamberlain's retirement, steals and blocks were not officially recorded by the NBA. Statistician Harvey Pollack, who spectated the game, reported that Chamberlain might have had more than one quintuple-double.
Hakeem Olajuwon may have come the closest to recording an official quintuple-double in an NBA game. On March 10, 1987, he recorded 38 points, 17 rebounds, 6 assists, 7 steals, and 12 blocks in a double overtime loss to the Seattle Supersonics. On March 3, 1990, Olajuwon recorded 29 points, 18 rebounds, 9 assists, 5 steals, and 11 blocks in a win over the Golden State Warriors.
Five-by-five
A five-by-five is a performance in which a player accumulates a total of five in five statistical categories—points, rebounds, assists, steals, and blocks—in a single game. Statistics for steals and blocks were not kept in the NBA until the 1973–74 season, so all NBA five-by-fives are known only from that season onward. Hakeem Olajuwon (six times) and Andrei Kirilenko (three times) are the only players to have recorded multiple five-by-fives (based on records since the 1984–85 season). Both are also the only players to record six-by-fives (at least six in all five statistical categories). Only twice has a five-by-five coincided with a triple-double (both by Olajuwon, one of which was 1 assist shy of a quadruple-double) and only three times has a player recorded a five-by-five without registering at least a double-double (two by Kirilenko and one by Marcus Camby).
Facts
All facts based on data since the 1985–86 season: