Edeka
The Edeka Group is the largest German supermarket corporation as of 2017, holding a market share of 20.3%. Founded in 1907, it consists today of several co-operatives of independent supermarkets all operating under the umbrella organisation Edeka Zentrale AG & Co KG, with headquarters in Hamburg. There are approximately 4,100 stores with the Edeka nameplate that range from small corner stores to hypermarkets. On 16 November 2007, Edeka reached an agreement with Tengelmann to purchase a 70% majority stake in Tengelmann's Plus discounter store division, which was then merged into Edeka's Netto brand, with some 4,200 stores by 2018. Under all brands the company operated a total of 13,646 stores at the end of 2017.
History
The cooperative was founded in 1907 as the E.d.K. (Einkaufsgenossenschaft der Kolonialwarenhändler im Halleschen Torbezirk zu Berlin, "Purchasing Cooperative of Colonial Goods Retailers in the Hallesches Tor district of Berlin"). In 1911, it was renamed as Edeka – a phonetic expansion of the previous abbreviation. The Edekabank was founded in 1914 and, from 1923, central billing was introduced. Although the name contains "Berlin", the group was officially founded in Leipzig.
After the Second World War, the reconstruction of the store network was led from the new Hamburg central offices. In 1972, the cooperatives changed structure and formed twelve regional companies, the umbrella corporation and the Edekabank converting from a cooperative to a public limited company.
In 2001, the Edeka own brand "Gut & Günstig" was founded. From 2003 to 2012 there was a cooperation with Globus SB-Warenhaus Holding.
Christmas 2015, the company attracted worldwide attention with the highly sentimental TV commercial #heimkommen, about a lonely grandfather desperate to reunite with his family for Christmas. Intended only for the German public, it reached over 43 million views worldwide on YouTube by 18 December 2015, and became a cultural phenomenon, with nearly 62 million views by June 2019.
A cooperation with Telekom Germany and the branding brand Edeka smart started on 15 February 2018. It replaced the existing cooperation with Vodafone and EDEKA mobil.
Brand names
Operational names of these stores include:
Stores not operating under the Edeka brand, but belonging to the group nonetheless:
Former brands were:
It also had holdings in Denmark, which were sold in 2009.
Edeka also operates a number of companies providing related services, for example the Edekabank.
Controversies
A 2019 Mother's Day online commercial showing a series of clips of fathers interacting with their children incompetently, followed by shots of caring mothers with their children, and the punchline "Mum, thank you for not being dad," was criticized widely for its stereotypical portrayal of the roles of mothers and fathers.
Stevie Schmiedel, a gender researcher and founder of the German branch of the feminist lobby organization "Pinkstinks," which campaigns against sexism in advertising, commented: "Maybe the advertisers really thought they were doing something good for women on Mother's Day. But everything went wrong. The commercial is pseudo-progressive. It divides and intensifies the fight between the sexes. A poisoned Mother's Day present."
Edeka was officially reprimanded by the Deutscher Werberat, the German advertising standards regulator, for breaching advertising standards by "reinforcing 1950's gender stereotypes," and while "ironic exaggeration is permissible, gender stereotyping is not." The authority also cited the large number of complaints and the debate about the commercial on social media, saying this showed that viewers either did not understand that it was meant to be ironical, or that they felt the ironic use of stereotypes was not acceptable to them.