Edgar Awards
The Edgar Allan Poe Awards, popularly called the Edgars, are presented every year by the Mystery Writers of America, based in New York City. Named after American writer Edgar Allan Poe (1809–1849), a pioneer in the genre, the awards honor the best in mystery fiction, non-fiction, television, film, and theater published or produced in the previous year.
Active author categories
Robert L. Fish Memorial Award
The Robert L. Fish Memorial Award was established in 1984 to honor the best first mystery short story by an American author. The winners are listed below.
Lilian Jackson Braun Award
The Lilian Jackson Braun Award was established in 2022 to honor Lilian Jackson Braun and is presented in the "best full-length, contemporary cozy mystery as submitted to and selected by a special MWA committee."
Sue Grafton Memorial Award
The Sue Grafton Memorial Award was established in 2019 to honor Sue Grafton and is presented to "the best novel in a series featuring a female protagonist." The winners are listed below.
Grand Master Award
The Edgar Allen Poe Grand Master Award was established in 1955. The award "acknowledges important contributions to the genre as well as for a body of work that is both significant and of consistent high quality." Winners are listed below.
Raven Award
The Raven Award was established in 1953 to honor "outstanding achievement in the mystery field outside of the realm of creative writing." The winners are listed below.
Ellery Queen Award
The Ellery Queen Award was established in 1983 "to honor outstanding writing teams and outstanding people in the mystery-publishing industry." The winners are listed below.
Simon & Schuster Mary Higgins Clark Award
The Simon & Schuster Mary Higgins Clark Award was established in 2001. The winners are listed below.
Active story categories
Critical/Biographical Work
The Edgar Allan Poe Award for Best Critical/Biographical Work was established in 1977. The winners are listed below.
Fact Crime
The Edgar Allan Poe Award for Best Fact Crime was established in 1948. The winners are listed below.
First Novel
The Edgar Allan Poe Award for Best First Novel was established in 1946. The winners are listed below.
Episode in a Television Series
The Edgar Allan Poe Award for Best Episode in a TV Series was established in 1952. The winners are listed below.
Juvenile
The Edgar Allan Poe Award for Best Juvenile  was established in 1961. The winners are listed below.
Novel
The Edgar Allan Poe Award for Best Novel was established in 1954. The winners are listed below.
Paperback or eBook Original
The Edgar Allan Poe Award for Best Paperback Original was established in 1970. The winners are listed below.
Short Story
The Edgar Allan Poe Award for Best Short Story was established in 1951. The winners are listed below.
Young Adult Novel
The Edgar Allan Poe Award for Best Young Adult Novel  was established in 1989. The winners are listed below.
Discontinued categories
Book Jacket
The Edgar Allan Poe Award for Best Book Jacket  was established in  1955 discontinued in 1975. 
Foreign Film
The Edgar Allan Poe Award for Best Foreign Film  was established in  1949 discontinued in 1966. 
Motion Picture Screenplay
The Edgar Allan Poe Award for Best Motion Picture Screenplay  was established in 1946 and discontinued in 2009. Winners are listed below. 
Mystery Criticism
The Edgar Allan Poe Award for Outstanding Mystery Criticism  was established in  1946 discontinued in 1967. 
Play
The Edgar Allan Poe Award for Best Play was established in 1950 and is irregular. 
Radio Drama
The Edgar Allan Poe Award for Best Radio Drama  was established in 1946 and discontinued in 1960. 
Special Award
The Edgar Allan Poe Special Award  was established in  1949 and is irregular.
Television Feature or Miniseries
The Edgar Allan Poe Award for Best Television Feature of Miniseries  was established in 1972 and discontinued in 2007. 