Fairfield, Connecticut
Fairfield is a town in Fairfield County, Connecticut, United States. It borders the city of Bridgeport and towns of Trumbull, Easton, Weston, and Westport along the Gold Coast of Connecticut. Located within the New York metropolitan area, it is around 43 miles northeast of Midtown Manhattan. As of 2020 the town had a population of 61,512.


History
Colonial era
In 1635, Puritans and Congregationalists in the Massachusetts Bay Colony, were dissatisfied with the rate of Anglican reform, and sought to establish an ecclesiastical society subject to their own rules and regulations. The Massachusetts General Court granted them permission to settle in the towns of Windsor, Wethersfield, and Hartford which is an area now known as Connecticut.
On January 14, 1639, a set of legal and administrative regulations called the Fundamental Orders was adopted and established Connecticut as a self-ruling entity.  By 1639, these settlers had started new towns in the surrounding areas. Roger Ludlowe, framer of the Fundamental Orders, purchased the land called Unquowa (presently called Fairfield), and established the name. The name "Fairfield" is commendatory.
According to historian John M. Taylor:
Towns created from Fairfield
Fairfield was one of the two principal settlements of the Connecticut Colony in southwestern Connecticut (the other was Stratford). The town line with Stratford was set in May 1661 by John Banks, an early Fairfield settler, Richard Olmstead, and Lt. Joseph Judson, who were both appointed as a committee by the Colony of Connecticut. The town line with Norwalk was not set until May 1685.
Over time, it gave rise to several new towns that broke off and incorporated separately. The following is a list of towns created from parts of Fairfield.
Revolutionary War
When the American Revolutionary War began in the 1770s, Fairfielders were caught in the crisis as much as, if not more than, the rest of their neighbors in Connecticut. In a predominantly Tory section of the colony, the people of Fairfield were early supporters of the cause for independence. Throughout the war, a constant battle was being fought across the Long Island Sound as Loyalists from British-controlled Long Island raided the coast in whaleboats and privateers. Gold Selleck Silliman, whose home still stands on Jennings Road, was put in charge of the coastal defenses.
In the spring of 1779, Silliman was kidnapped from his home by Loyalist raiders in preparation for a British raid on Fairfield County. His wife, Mary Silliman watched from their home as, on the morning of July 7, 1779, approximately 2,000 British troops landed on Fairfield Beach near Pine Creek Point and invaded the town; the force proceeded to burn Fairfield due to the town's support for Patriot cause. A decade later, President George Washington noted that after traveling through Fairfield that "the destructive evidence of British cruelty are yet visible both in Norwalk and Fairfield; as there are the chimneys of many burnt houses standing in them yet".
Nineteenth century
Fairfield was an agricultural town for the entirety of this century. Corn, rye, wheat, potato and flax were the main exports of the town. Ships left Black Rock and Southport harbor bound for New York, Boston and the West Indies. The New York, New Haven, and Hartford Railroad connected Fairfield to New York City, now a 2 hour train ride. The industrial and population growth of the newly formed neighboring Bridgeport led to the county seat of Fairfield County to be moved from Fairfield to Bridgeport as the old courthouse prove inadequate, in 1853. As the nation expanded west, where soil was better, agriculture in the region began to decline. Many Fairfielders sold their land, moved west, or to cities to work in factories. In the late 1800s, immigration from Poland, Italy, Hungary, Russia and other places to the United States, where many worked in Bridgeport factories clustered in dense ethnic neighborhoods, led to some eventually purchasing land in Fairfield's Eastern section, notably Tunix Hill by Hungarians, where they cultivated land. Black Rock, and what is now Bridgeport's West End was annexed by Bridgeport by 1870. For 5 cents, Bridgeport's residents could visit Fairfield beaches, leading to a summer colony off Reef Road by 1887. 
Twentieth century
The First World War brought Fairfield out of its agrarian past by triggering an unprecedented economic boom in Bridgeport, which was the center of a large munitions industry at the time. The city population grew by over 50,000 people in 20 months, and the newly built wartime Remington Arms-UMC plant employed 20,000 people by 1916, producing 50% of allied ammunition cartridges. The prosperity accompanied a temporary housing shortage in the city, and many of the workers looked to Fairfield to build their homes, and the newly founded Bridgeport Housing Company (run by the chamber of commerce), built more homes in Fairfield in the form of the Grassmere Village and Lordship Village developments. The trolley and later the automobile made the countryside accessible to these newly rich members of the middle class, who brought with them new habits, new attitudes, and new modes of dress. The prosperity lasted throughout the twenties.
By the time of the Wall Street Crash of 1929, the population had increased to 17,000 from the 6,000 it had been just before the war. Even during the Depression, the town kept expanding. Fairfield became an attractive place for wealthy New York City residents to have a weekend home, vacation, or live in, looking for relaxation in a country atmosphere, with its beaches, fancy hotels, mansions. 
The grounding of a barge with two crewmen on Penfield Reef in Fairfield during a gale led to the 1st civilian helicopter hoist rescue in history, on November 29, 1945. The helicopter flew from the nearby Sikorsky Aircraft plant in Bridgeport, Connecticut. Fairfield University was founded in 1943 by Jesuits.
The opening of the Connecticut Turnpike in the 1950s brought another wave of development to Fairfield, and by the 1960s the town's residential, suburban character was firmly established. Families from Bridgeport and elsewhere, looking to live to the suburbs, moved into Fairfield in large numbers starting after the Second World War. Fairfield grew from 21,135 residents in 1940 to 59,404 in 2000. Bridgeport's population fell in that same timespan.  
In 1971, Fairfield became the home of the corporate headquarters of General Electric (GE), one of the world's 5 largest companies at the time, which relocated from Manhattan. On May 8, 2017, GE relocated to Boston, Massachusetts. 
Geography
The town is on the shore of the Long Island Sound.  According to the United States Census Bureau, the town has a total area of 31.3 square miles (81 km2), of which 30.0 square miles (78 km2) is land and 3.4 square kilometres (1.3 sq mi), or 4.15%, is water.  The Mill River, the waters of which feed Lake Mohegan, flows through the town.
Neighborhoods
Fairfield consists of many neighborhoods. The best known are wealthy Southport, where General Electric Chief Executive Officer Jack Welch lived for many years, and Greenfield Hill, with its large green areas, famous dogwood trees, and picturesque green with its white-spired Congregational church. Other neighborhoods include Stratfield, Tunxis Hill, the University area, Grasmere, Mill Plain, Knapp's Village, Melville Village, Holland Hill, Murray, and the Fairfield Beach area, which has recently undergone a renaissance with the construction of many new homes by residents wishing to live in proximity to the beach and downtown. This has resulted in steadily rising property prices. Two shopping districts in town include the Post Road (U.S. 1) and Black Rock Turnpike.
Demographics
As of the census of 2010, there were 59,404 people in the town, organized into 20,457 households and 14,846 families.  The population density was 1,927 inhabitants per square mile (744/km2). There were 21,648 housing units at an average density of 703 per square mile (271/km2).  The racial makeup of the town was 91.6% White, 3.7% Asian, 1.8% African American, 0.06% Native American, 0.01% Pacific Islander, 1.2% from other races, and 1.6% from two or more races.  5.0% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.
There were 20,457 households, out of which 38.3% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 60.6% were married couples living together, 9.1% had a female householder with no husband present, and 27.4% were non-families. 22.3% of all households were made up of individuals, and 15.1% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older.  The average household size was 2.69 and the average family size was 3.19.
In the town, the population was spread out, with 25.4% under the age of 18, 11.1% from 18 to 24, 21.1% from 25 to 44, 27.4% from 45 to 64, and 15.1% who were 65 years of age or older.  The median age was 40 years.  For every 100 females, there were 90.5 males.  For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 85.6 males.
The median household income (in 2013 dollars) was $117,705 (these figures had risen to $103,352 and $121,749 respectively as of a 2007 estimate). Males had a median income of $69,525 versus $44,837 for females. The per capita income for the city was $55,733.  2.9% of the population and 1.8% of families were below the poverty line.  Out of the total population, 2.8% of those under the age of 18 and 3.6% of those 65 and older were living below the poverty line.
Economy
In May 2012, Moody's Investors Service revised the Town of Fairfield's $192 million general obligation bond debt from negative to stable. In June 2012, Moody's awarded Fairfield with an AAA bond rating, which it maintains to this date.
Large and distinctive companies
Arts and culture
Historic sites
Events
Parks and recreation
Fairfield residents enjoy a wealth of recreational opportunities, many of which stem from Fairfield's enviable location on the Long Island Sound.
Government
The town government consists of the three-member Board of Selectmen, a Representative Town Meeting (RTM), a Board of Finance, a Board of Education, a Town Planning and Zoning Commission (TPZ), and many other politically appointed commissions, boards, and committees. The current First Selectman is Brenda Kupchick (R).
Board of Selectmen
Republican controlled 2–1
The town has no criminal or civil court system and all trials are held and handled by the Bridgeport Superior Court system. However, the town does also offer access to a Juvenile Review Board (JRB) for certain juvenile cases outlined by the Fairfield Police Department.
In the Connecticut General Assembly, Fairfield is represented by two Republicans, Sen. Tony Hwang and Rep. Laura Devlin (CT-134), and two Democrats, Rep. Cristin McCarthy-Vahey (CT-133) and Jennifer Leeper (CT-132).
Education
Fairfield has two public high schools, Fairfield Warde and Fairfield Ludlowe; three public middle schools, Roger Ludlowe, Tomlinson, and Fairfield Woods Middle School; and eleven public elementary schools.
Fairfield has several Catholic schools, including two high schools, Fairfield Prep and Notre Dame, and two primary schools, St. Thomas Aquinas and Our Lady of the Assumption. A third Catholic primary school, Holy Family, was closed by the Diocese of Bridgeport at the end of the 2009–2010 academic year.
Non-religious private schools include Fairfield Country Day School and the Unquowa School.
Fairfield is also home to two post-secondary institutions, Fairfield University and Sacred Heart University.
Media
Infrastructure
Transportation
Fairfield is traversed by U.S. 1, Interstate 95, and the Merritt Parkway. Fairfield is located along Amtrak's Northeast Corridor and Metro North's New Haven Line, although no Amtrak trains stop in Fairfield. Fairfield Metro station, Fairfield station, and Southport station are served by Metro North trains traveling between New York City and New Haven.
Emergency services
The Fairfield Police Department was created in 1926, approximately 287 years after the town was founded.
The town of Fairfield is protected by the 95 career firefighters of the Fairfield Fire Department (FFD), and volunteer firefighters of the Southport Volunteer Fire Department and Stratfield Volunteer Fire Department. The career Fairfield Fire Department operates five fire stations, located throughout the town, and uses a fire apparatus fleet of five engine companies, one ladder company, one rescue company, three fireboats, and 1 Shift Commander's Unit, as well as many special support, and reserve units. The Southport Volunteer Fire Department has served the community since 1895. The Stratfield Volunteer Fire Department has several stations and has served the community since 1920.
Notable people