Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Climate Action
The Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Climate Action (German: Bundesministerium für Wirtschaft und Klimaschutz, pronounced [ˈbʊndəsminɪsˌteːʁiʊm fyːɐ̯ ˈvɪʁtʃaft ʊnt ˈkliːmaˌʃʊt͡s] (listen)), abbreviated BMWK (was BMWi), is a cabinet-level ministry  of the Federal Republic of Germany. It was previously known as the "Ministry of Economy". It was recreated in 2005 as "Ministry of Economics and Technology" after it had previously been merged with other ministries to form the Federal Ministry for Economics and Labour between 2002 and 2005. The ministry is advised by the Council of Advisors on Digital Economy.
History
The historical predecessor of the current Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Climate Action was the Reichswirtschaftsamt (Reich Economic Office), founded in 1917. In 1919, this became the Reichswirtschaftsministerium (Reich Ministry of Economy), which existed until 1945.
In postwar occupied Germany, its functions were exercised by the Administrative Office of Economy (German: Verwaltungsamt für Wirtschaft) between 1946 and 1949. After the founding of the Federal Republic of Germany, the Federal Ministry of Economics (German: Bundesministerium für Wirtschaft) existed from 1949 to 1998. From May 1971 to December 1972, it was temporarily merged with the Federal Ministry of Finance, in the Federal Ministry of Economics and Finance. In 1998 the technology section of the Ministry of Research was added, making it the Federal Ministry of Economics and Technology. 
Between 2002 and 2005, it was merged with the Federal Ministry of Economics and Technology and one part of the Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs - the other part being merged with the old Federal Ministry for Health, then the Ministry of Health and Social Security. This transformations aimed to consolidate the policy-fields of economics and labour market, on which the second term of chancellor Gerhard Schröder wanted to focus, into one hand. Because the new Ministry was very large and important, it was often referred to as a super-ministry (Superministerium) and its minister as a super-minister (Superminister). The creation of the new Ministry was widely seen as failed, basically because of the poor performance of the only office-holder Wolfgang Clement.
Under the following grand coalition headed by Angela Merkel, the portfolio reshuffle was reversed, and the old Federal Ministries of Economics and Technology, of Labour and Social Affairs and of Health were created once again as Federal Ministry of Economics and Technology. It was renamed to Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Energy in 2013.
Structure
The Ministry is organised into 9 departments and one central department.
The ministry is headquartered in Berlin.
Agencies
In addition to its own operations, the Ministry also oversees the following agencies:
Ministers and Secretaries of State
Ministers
Political Party:
  CDU
SPD
FDP
IND
CSU
  Green
Ministry for Economy (1949–1998)
Ministry for Economics and Technology (1998–2002)
Ministry for Economics and Labour (2002–2005)
Ministry of Economics and Technology (2005–2013)
Ministry for Economic Affairs and Energy (2013–2021)
Ministry for Economic Affairs and Climate Action (since 2021)