Frederik, Crown Prince of Denmark
Frederik, Crown Prince of Denmark, Count of Monpezat, RE, SKmd (Frederik André Henrik Christian; born 26 May 1968) is the heir apparent to the Danish throne. He is the elder son of Queen Margrethe II and Prince Henrik.
Early life
Crown Prince Frederik was born at Rigshospitalet the Copenhagen University Hospital in Copenhagen, on 26 May 1968, to the then Princess Margrethe, oldest daughter of Frederick IX and heir presumptive to the Danish throne, and Prince Henrik. At the time of his birth, his maternal grandfather was on the throne of Denmark and his matrilineal great-grandfather was on the throne of Sweden.
He was christened on 24 June 1968, at Holmen Church, in Copenhagen. He was named Frederik for his maternal grandfather, King Frederick IX, continuing the Danish royal tradition of the heir apparent being named either Frederick or Christian. His middle names honour his paternal grandfather, André de Laborde de Monpezat; his father, Prince Henrik; and his maternal great-grandfather, Christian X. Frederik's godparents were his maternal aunt, the Queen of the Hellenes; his paternal uncle, Count Etienne de Laborde de Monpezat; his extended relatives, Prince Georg of Denmark and Grand Duchess Joséphine-Charlotte of Luxembourg; and friends of his parents, Baron Christian de Watteville-Berckheim and Birgitta Juel Hillingsø.
He became Crown Prince of Denmark when his mother ascended to the throne as Margrethe II on 14 January 1972. Crown prince Frederik's only sibling is the younger Prince Joachim of Denmark.
Education and career
Frederik attended primary school at Krebs' Skole during the years 1974–1981, from 1974 to 1976 as a private pupil at Amalienborg Palace, and from the third form at Krebs' Skole. In the period 1982–1983, he was a boarder at École des Roches in Normandy, France. In 1986, Frederik graduated from the upper secondary school of Øregaard Gymnasium. In addition to Danish, he is fluent in French (his father's language), English, and German.
In 1986 he began a course in Political Science at Aarhus University. This included a year at Harvard University (1992–1993) under the name of Frederik Henriksen, studying political science. He then took up a position for three months with the Danish UN mission in New York in 1994. In 1995, he obtained his MSc degree in political science from Aarhus University. He completed the course in the prescribed number of years with an exam result above average, thus becoming the first royal to obtain a master's degree. His final paper was an analysis on the foreign policy of the Baltic States, which he had visited several times during his studies. The prince was posted as First Secretary to the Danish Embassy in Paris from October 1998 to October 1999.
Military career
Frederik has completed extensive military studies and training in all three services, notably completing the education as frogman in the naval elite special operations forces Frømandskorpset.
In the period 2001 and 2002, he completed further training for leaders at the Royal Danish Defence College. Frederik remains active in the defence services, and in the period 2002–2003 served as a staff officer at Defence Command Denmark, and from 2003 as a senior lecturer with the Institute of Strategy at the Royal Danish Defence College.
Marriage and children
During a Council of State on 8 October 2003, Queen Margrethe gave her consent to the marriage of Crown Prince Frederik to Mary Elizabeth Donaldson, an Australian marketing consultant whom the prince had met while attending the Sydney Olympics in 2000. Their wedding took place on 14 May 2004 at Copenhagen Cathedral, Copenhagen.
The couple have four children: Christian (born 15 October 2005), Isabella (born 21 April 2007) and twins Vincent and Josephine (born 8 January 2011).
Areas of interest
Scientific research, climate change and sustainability
Frederik has a special interest in scientific research, climate change and sustainability. He was interviewed by Financial Times and CNN International, in the Future Cities program, for their commitment to sustainability. He participated in expeditions, forums and events on climate. The prince has represented Denmark as a promoter of sustainable Danish energy. The prince was one of the authors of the Polartokt Kongelig (Polar Cruise Royal), about the challenges of climate, published in 2009 with a preface written by Kofi Annan. In 2010, wrote the book's foreword Naturen og klimaændringerne i Nordøstgrønland (The nature and climate change in Greenland). Supports scientific research projects, as a patron, as expeditionary, with regular attendance at events and through his foundation, Kronprins Frederiks Fond.
Sports and health
The prince encourages Danish participation in sports. He is a patron and honorary member of various sports organizations, and a member of the International Olympic Committee. He also promotes an active lifestyle in society.
Frederik is an avid sportsman, running marathons in Copenhagen, New York and Paris, and completing the 42 kilometers with a respectable time of 3 hours, 22 minutes and 50 seconds in the Copenhagen Marathon. In 2013, he completed the KMD Ironman Copenhagen in the time of 10:45:32 and is the first royal person to complete an Ironman.
Frederik is a keen sailor, being a competitive Farr 40 skipper as well as an accomplished Dragon boater. He won victories and was a leader in the steps championships. He finished in fourth place in the European Championship Dragon Class 2003 (with 51 boats participating), and at number 4 in the Farr 40 Worlds 2008 (with 33 boats participating). He was the first in his class boat in Fyn Cup 2010 in Denmark, and at number 4 in the Dragon DM 2011 (with 25 boats participating).
In 2016, in lieu of the Olympics in Rio, Frederik told press that he did not regret not chasing his dream to compete in the Olympics after meeting his wife. He had always thought about training and competing, but that would have required him to limit his activities and concentrate on training, instead he put his energy into other aspects of life. In October 2016, Frederik had to cancel his appearance at the royal reception for the Danish Olympic and Paralympic athletes after he fractured his spine while jumping on a trampoline with his eldest son.
Frederik also took part in the relay event during the 2019 IAAF World Cross Country Championships in Aarhus in March 2019.
Fredrik also competes in cross-country skiing, and has skied the Vasaloppet with Norway's Crown Prince Haakon.
Royal Run
In celebration of his 50th birthday, on 21 May 2018, Frederik initiated a public running event across the five biggest cities in Denmark called "Royal Run" with more than 70.000 participants including Frederik and his own family. The event was generally deemed as "exceeding expectations" by the public.
The event has since become annual and was continued in 2019 and 2021. The 2020 version was cancelled due to the COVID-19 situation in Denmark.
Crown Prince Frederik's Foundation
The purpose of the foundation is to provide financial assistance to students of social policy and sciences, for one year's study at Harvard. and provide financial support for scientific expeditions, particularly to foreign parts of the world, including Greenland and the Faeroe Islands and sports purposes, including those with a particularly social aspect.
Participation in expeditions
The Crown Prince participated in an expedition to Mongolia in 1986. In 2000, the Crown Prince participated in "Expedition Sirius 2000", which was a four-month and 2,795 km dog-sledge expedition in the northern part of Greenland. The expedition Sirius marked the 50-year anniversary of the Sirius Patrol. Prince Frederik was part of the polar expedition as a film photographer, whose job was to ensure an optimal coverage of this event.
International Olympic Committee
On 9 October 2009, Crown Prince Frederik was elected a member of the International Olympic Committee, replacing former Danish member Kaj Holm, who had reached the age of retirement. The Crown Prince's candidature was met with some skepticism in Denmark, as it would mean that the Crown Prince would be on a semi-political committee along with several people who are suspected or even convicted of criminal acts. Another concern was whether or not the Crown Prince's loyalty would be towards his country and government, as the Danish constitution prescribes, or with the International Olympic Committee, as is sworn upon election to the committee. The Crown Prince was given special observer status in National Olympic Committee and Sports Confederation of Denmark, as a way to allow him to work, without having political power.
Frederik announced that his point of focus and reason for joining the International Olympic Committee is to promote an active lifestyle among youth. He was elected for an eight-year term, and made it clear that he would terminate his membership upon ascending the Danish throne.
In 2012, Frederick carried the Olympic flame through Notting Hill, a neighbourhood in West London.
In 2016, Frederik faced criticism for voting against Danish Minister for Culture Bertel Haarder and a majority in the Danish Parliament's wishes on the subject of whether or not Russia should be allowed to compete at the 2016 Summer Olympics following allegations of state-sponsored doping.
On 19 June 2017, the Crown Prince announced that he would continue another term of 8 years. However, in 2021, Frederik was announced that he would step down as an active member of the International Olympic Committee at the committee's annual session prior to the 2020 Summer Olympics, citing a wish to intensify his everyday work as the reason for stepping down in the middle of his term.
Titles, styles, honours and arms
Titles and styles
His official title in Danish is Hans Kongelige Højhed Kronprins Frederik af Danmark, Greve af Monpezat (His Royal Highness Crown Prince Frederik of Denmark, Count of Monpezat).
Honours
The Crown Prince has received a number of honours.
National honours
 Denmark:
 Greenland: Recipient of the Nersornaat Medal for Meritorious Service, 1st Class
Foreign honours
See also
Notes