Fuji TV
JOCX-DTV (channel 8), branded as Fuji TV (フジテレビ, Fuji Terebi) and colloquially known as CX, is a Japanese television station based in Odaiba, Minato, Tokyo, Japan. Owned and operated by the Fuji Television Network, Inc. it is the key station of the Fuji News Network (FNN) and the Fuji Network System. It is also known for its long-time slogan, "If it's not fun, it's not TV!"
Fuji Television also operates three premium television stations, known as "Fuji TV One" ("Fuji TV 739"—sports/variety, including all Tokyo Yakult Swallows home games), "Fuji TV Two" ("Fuji TV 721"—drama/anime), and "Fuji TV Next" ("Fuji TV CSHD"—live premium shows) (called together as "Fuji TV OneTwoNext"), all available in high-definition.
Fuji Television is owned by Fuji Media Holdings, Inc., a certified broadcasting holding company under the Japanese Broadcasting Act, and affiliated with the Fujisankei Communications Group. The current Fuji Television was established in October 2008. Fuji Media Holdings is the former Fuji Television founded in 1957.
Offices
The headquarters are located at 2-4-8, Daiba, Minato, Tokyo. The Kansai office is found at Aqua Dojima East, Dojima, Kita-ku, Osaka. The Nagoya office is found at Telepia, Higashi-sakura, Higashi-ku, Nagoya. The Japanese television station also has 12 bureau offices in other parts of the world in locations in countries such as, France, Germany, Russia, USA, South Korea, China, Italy, Thailand and the UK.
History
Fuji Television Network Inc. was founded in 1957 by Nobutaka Shikanai and Shigeo Mizuno, presidents of Nippon Broadcasting System and Nippon Cultural Broadcasting respectively.  It started broadcasting in March 1959. In June of that year, Fuji TV formed a network with Tokai TV, Kansai TV, and KBC Television. In October 1966, Fuji launched FNN (Fuji News Network), the third national TV network, with Fuji-produced national news programming being aired to the network's affiliates in regional Japan.
On April 1, 1986, Fuji TV changed their corporate logo from the old "Channel 8" logo, to the "Medama" logo used by the Fujisankei Communications Group. In 1986 and 1987, Fuji TV worked with Nintendo to create two games called All Night Nippon Super Mario Bros. and Yume Kojo: Doki Doki Panic for the Famicom. All Night Nippon Super Mario Bros. was a retooled version of Super Mario Bros. with some minor changes, such as normal levels being replaced with levels from Super Mario Bros.: The Lost Levels and some enemies being replaced with Japanese celebrities with comedic effect. Yume Kojo: Doki Doki Panic later became the basis for Super Mario Bros. 2, which was subsequently released a year later.
In October 1987, Fuji TV began branding their late-night/early-morning slots collectively as JOCX-TV2 (meaning "alternative JOCX-TV") in an effort to market the traditionally unprofitable time slots and give opportunities to young creators to express their new ideas. JOCX-TV2 featured numerous experimental programs on low budgets under this and follow-on brands, a notable example being Zuiikin' English which first aired in spring 1992. The JOCX-TV2 branding itself was changed in October 1989 to JOCX-TV+, which lasted until September 1991, when it was replaced with GARDEN/JOCX-MIDNIGHT in October 1991. Meanwhile, Fuji TV helped produce only the third series of the British children's television programme Thomas the Tank Engine & Friends (now called Thomas & Friends) with its creator and producer Britt Allcroft. The GARDEN/JOCX-MIDNIGHT branding lasted until September 1992 when it was replaced with the JUNGLE branding, which lasted from October 1992 to September 1993. The JOCX-MIDNIGHT branding was introduced in October 1993 to replace the previous JUNGLE branding, and lasted until March 1996 when Fuji TV decided to stop branding their late-night/early-morning slots.
On March 10, 1997, Fuji TV moved from their old headquarters in Kawadacho, Shinjuku, into a new building in Odaiba, Minato, designed by Kenzo Tange.
Since 2002, Fuji TV has co-sponsored the Clarion Girl contest, held annually to select a representative for Clarion who will represent Clarion's car audio products in television and print advertising campaigns during the following year.
On April 1, 2006, Fuji TV split up the radio broadcasting and station license of Nippon Broadcasting System into a newly established company with the same name. The remaining of the old Nippon Broadcasting System was dissolved into Fuji TV. This resulted in the assets of  Nippon Broadcasting System being transferred over to Fuji TV.
On October 1, 2008, Fuji TV became a certified broadcasting holding company "Fuji Media Holdings, Inc." (株式会社フジ・メディア・ホールディングス, Kabushiki gaisha Fuji Media Hōrudingusu) and newly founded "Fuji Television Network Inc." took over the broadcasting business.
Fuji TV, which broadcasts Formula One in Japan since 1987, is the only media sponsor of a Formula One Grand Prix in the world. Fuji TV has also licensed numerous Formula One video games including Human Grand Prix IV: F1 Dream Battle.
Coverage
Soccer
Figure Skating
Baseball
Volleyball
Boxing
Judo
Horse-racing
Multi-sport events
Basketball
Golf
Mixed martial arts
Motorsport
Volleyball
TV broadcasting
Analog
JOCX-TV - Fuji Television Analog (フジテレビジョン・アナログ)
Digital
JOCX-DTV - Fuji Digital Television (フジデジタルテレビジョン)
Branch stations
Overseas
Networks
Programming
Anime
Tokusatsu
Japanese
Korean
Since 2010, Fuji TV started airing Korean dramas on its Hallyu Alpha (韓流α, Hanryū Arufa, "Korean Wave Alpha") block programming.
Cookery
News and information
Variety shows
Reality television
Game shows
Foreign
Controversies
On August 7–21, 2011, more than 2,000 protesters from Japanese Culture Channel Sakura and other groups rallied in front of Fuji Television and Fuji Media Holdings' headquarters in Odaiba, Tokyo to demonstrate against what they perceived as the network's increased use of South Korean content, information manipulation and insulting treatment of Japanese people. Channel Sakura called Fuji TV the "Traitor Network" in these protests.
Further on June 29, 2015, Fuji TV apologized for running subtitles during a show earlier in the month that inaccurately described South Koreans interviewed on the street as saying they “hate” Japan. The apology came after a successful online petition over the weekend, with people stating the major broadcaster had fabricated the subtitles to breed Anti-Korean sentiment amongst the Japanese public. Fuji TV explained that both interviewees indeed spoke of their dislike of Japan during the interviews, but it accidentally ran clips that didn't contain that message. According to the broadcaster, “we aired these inaccurate clips because of a mix-up during the editing process as well as our failure to check the final footage sufficiently.”
See also
Notes