Geography of association football
The following article gives a list of association football confederations, sub-confederations and associations around the world. The sport's international governing body is FIFA, but those associations not affiliated with FIFA are also included in this article.
Most European, African, and Asian countries have two principal competitions: a more prestigious league which is typically a double round-robin tournament restricted to the elite clubs, and a cup which is a single-elimination tournament open to both the elite and lesser clubs.
In the Americas, leagues are often organised as either multi-stage tournaments or separate Apertura and Clausura stages.
By continent
Affiliated with FIFA

There are currently 211 national associations which are members of FIFA. An additional 11 associations are full or associate members of a FIFA continental confederation, but not members of FIFA.
By subregion
Asia
¹ It may be revived in 2022 – see 2022 ASEAN Club Championship.
By country
The football associations listed in this section are members of FIFA-affiliated confederations. They are listed by their official names registered with FIFA.
Europe
All UEFA associations are affiliated with FIFA.
South America
All CONMEBOL associations are affiliated with FIFA.
Non-FIFA associations
The football associations in this section represent fully and partially recognized sovereign states, dependent territories, and stateless nations that are not members of FIFA or a FIFA confederation. 
Several of these non-FIFA associations are included in the World Football Elo Ratings, which ranks all national association football teams from FIFA-affiliated confederations, in addition to some unaffiliated teams. Several of these associations are also members of the Confederation of Independent Football Associations and/or the International Island Games Association.
Europe
Oceania
Regional
Beneath the national level, governance of football may be divided up into regional or territorial associations. Other non-national associations represent stateless populations, diasporas or micronations. Details of these are listed at non-FIFA international football.