Griselda Blanco
Griselda Blanco Restrepo (February 15, 1943 – September 3, 2012), known as the Black Widow, was a Colombian drug lady of the Medellín Cartel, and in the Miami-based cocaine drug trade and underworld, during the 1970s through the early 2000s. She was shot dead on September 3, 2012, at the age of 69.
Biography
Early life
Griselda Blanco Restrepo was born in Cartagena on the country's north coast. She and her mother, Ana Blanco, moved to Medellín when she was three years old. Upon arriving there, she adopted a criminal lifestyle. Blanco's former lover, Charles Cosby, recounted that at the age of 11 she allegedly kidnapped, attempted to ransom and eventually shot a child from an upscale flatland neighborhood near her own neighborhood. Blanco had become a pickpocket before she even turned 13. To escape the sexual assaults of her mother's boyfriend, she ran away from home at the age of 19 and resorted to looting in Medellín until the age of 20.
Drug business
Blanco was a figure in the drug trade from Colombia to Miami, New York and California.
In the mid-1970s, she illegally immigrated to the United States with false passports and settled in Queens, New York. She established a sizable cocaine business there and in April 1975, she was indicted on federal drug conspiracy charges along with 30 of her subordinates. She fled to Colombia before she could be arrested, but returned to the United States and settled in Miami in the late 1980s.
Her return more or less coincided with the beginning of very public violent conflicts that involved hundreds of murders and killings yearly which were associated with the high crime epidemic that swept the City of Miami in the 1980s. The struggle by law enforcement to put an end to the influx of cocaine into Miami led to the creation of CENTAC 26 (Central Tactical Unit), a joint operation between the Miami-Dade Police Department and the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) anti-drug operation.
Blanco was involved in the drug-related violence known as the Miami Drug War or the Cocaine Cowboy Wars that plagued Miami in the late 1970s and early 1980s. This was a time when cocaine was trafficked more than cannabis.
The distribution network, which spanned the United States, earned $80 million per month.
Arrest
On February 17, 1985 Blanco was arrested in her home by the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) and charged with conspiring to manufacture, import, and distribute cocaine. The case went to trial in federal court in New York City where she was found guilty and sentenced to 15 years.
While serving her sentence, she was charged with three counts of first-degree murder by the state of Florida. The prosecution made a deal with one of Blanco's most trusted hitmen, Jorge Ayala, who agreed to testify against her. However, the case collapsed due to technicalities relating to a phone sex scandal between Ayala and two female secretaries who worked in the state attorney’s office. Blanco pleaded guilty in 1998 and was sentenced to 20 years in prison. In 2002, Blanco suffered a heart attack in prison.
In 2004, she was released and deported to Medellín. Before her murder in 2012, she was last seen in May 2007 at Bogotá Airport.
Death
On the night of 3 September 2012, Blanco bought $150 worth of meat at Cardiso butcher shop on the corner of 29th Street in Medellín. She died at age of 69 when she was shot in the head and shoulder by a motorcyclist who entered the shop.
Personal life
Blanco's first husband was Carlos Trujillo with whom she had three sons, Dixon, Uber, and Osvaldo, all of them poorly educated.
Blanco had her youngest son, Michael Corleone Blanco, with her third husband, Darío Sepúlveda. Her husband left her in 1983, returned to Colombia, and kidnapped Michael when he and Blanco disagreed over who would have custody. Blanco paid to have Sepúlveda assassinated in Colombia, and her son returned to her in Miami.
According to the Miami New Times, "Michael's father and older siblings were all killed before he reached adulthood. His mother was in prison for most of his childhood and teenage years, and he was raised by his maternal grandmother and legal guardians." In 2012, Michael was put under house arrest after an arrest in May on two felony counts of cocaine trafficking and conspiracy to traffic in cocaine. He appeared on a 2018 episode of the Investigation Discovery documentary series, Evil Lives Here, to recount his lonely childhood. In 2019, he was featured in the VH1 docuseries Cartel Crew, which follows the descendants of drug lords. He also runs a clothing brand, "Puro Blanco".
According to Michael, his mother became a born-again Christian.
In 2004, the heir to her legacy and to some of her vast fortune, goddaughter Ashley Uriquio, married Raymond LaFountain-Gotti, the mafioso and alleged son of John Gotti Sr.
Popular culture
Blanco has been featured in multiple documentaries, series, films, and songs, including several forthcoming projects.
See also
References
Sources