Hirsutism
Hirsutism is excessive body hair on parts of the body where hair is normally absent or minimal. The word is from early 17th century: from Latin hirsutus meaning "hairy". It usually refers to a "male" pattern of hair growth in a female that may be a sign of a more serious medical condition, especially if it develops well after puberty. Cultural stigma against hirsutism can cause much psychological distress and social difficulty. Discrimination based on facial hirsutism often leads to the avoidance of social situations and to symptoms of anxiety and depression.
Hirsutism is usually the result of an underlying endocrine imbalance, which may be adrenal, ovarian, or central. It can be caused by increased levels of androgen hormones. The amount and location of the hair is measured by a Ferriman-Gallwey score. It is different from hypertrichosis, which is excessive hair growth anywhere on the body.
Treatments may include certain birth control pills, antiandrogens, or insulin sensitizers.
Hirsutism affects between 5 to 15% of women across all ethnic backgrounds. Depending on the definition and the underlying data, approximately 40% of women have some degree of facial hair. About 10 to 15% of cases of hirsutism are idiopathic with no known cause.
Causes
The causes of hirsutism can be divided into endocrine imbalances and non-endocrine etiologies. It is important to begin by first determining the distribution of body hair growth. If hair growth follows a male distribution, it could indicate the presence of increased androgens or hyperandrogenism. However, there are other hormones not related to androgens that can lead to hirsutism. A detailed history is taken by a provider in search of possible causes for hyperandrogenism or other non-endocrine-related causes. If the distribution of hair growth occurs throughout the body, this is referred to as hypertrichosis, not hirsutism.
Endocrine causes
Endocrine causes of hirsutism include:
Non-endocrine causes
Causes of hirsutism not related to hyperandrogenism include:
Diagnosis
Hirsutism is a clinical diagnosis of excessive androgenic, terminal hair growth. A complete physical evaluation should be done prior to initiating more extensive studies, the examiner should differentiate between widespread body hair increase and male pattern virilization. One method of evaluating hirsutism is the Ferriman-Gallwey Score which gives a score based on the amount and location of hair growth. The Ferriman-Gallwey Score has various cutoffs due to variable expressivity of hair growth based on ethnic background.
Diagnosis of patients with even mild hirsutism should include assessment of ovulation and ovarian ultrasound, due to the high prevalence of polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS), as well as 17α-hydroxyprogesterone (because of the possibility of finding non-classic 21-hydroxylase deficiency). People with hirsutism may present with an elevated serum dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate (DHEA-S) level, however, additional imaging is required to discriminate between malignant and benign etiologies of adrenal hyperandrogenism.  Levels greater than 700 μg/dL are indicative of adrenal gland dysfunction, particularly congenital adrenal hyperplasia due to 21-hydroxylase deficiency. However, PCOS and idiopathic hirsutism make up 90% of cases.
Treatment
Treatment of hirsutism is indicated when hair growth causes patient distress. The two main approaches to treatment are pharmacologic therapies targeting androgen production/action, and direct hair removal methods including electrolysis and photo-epilation. These may be used independently or in combination.
Pharmacologic therapies
Common medications consist of antiandrogens, insulin sensitizers, and oral contraceptive pills. All three types of therapy have demonstrated efficacy on their own, however insulin sensitizers are shown to be less effective than antiandrogens and oral contraceptive pills. The therapies may be combined, as directed by a physician, in line with the patient's medical goals. Antiandrogens are drugs that block the effects of androgens like testosterone and dihydrotestosterone (DHT) in the body. They are the most effective pharmacologic treatment for patient-important hirsutism, however they have teratogenic potential, and are therefore not recommended in people who are pregnant or desire pregnancy. Current data does not favor any one type of oral contraceptive over another.
List of medications:
Other methods