Hurricane Nora (1997)
Hurricane Nora was only the third tropical cyclone on record to reach Arizona as a tropical storm, and one of the rare cyclones to make landfall in Baja California. Nora was the fourteenth named tropical cyclone and the seventh hurricane of the 1997 Pacific hurricane season. The September storm formed off the Pacific coast of Mexico, and aided by waters warmed by the 1997–98 El Niño event, eventually peaked at Category 4 intensity on the Saffir–Simpson hurricane scale.
Nora took an unusual path, making landfall twice as a hurricane in the Baja California Peninsula. Weakening quickly after landfall, its remnants lashed the Southwestern United States with tropical storm-force winds, torrential rain, and flooding. The storm was blamed for two direct casualties in Mexico, as well as substantial beach erosion on the Mexican coast, flash flooding in Baja California, and record precipitation in Arizona. It persisted far inland and eventually dissipated near the Arizona–Nevada border.
Meteorological history
The system that was to become Hurricane Nora was likely related to a tropical wave, that had moved off the coast of Africa at the end of August 1997. The wave subsequently moved across the Atlantic Ocean and spawned Hurricane Erika in early September, before it continued to move westwards through the Caribbean Sea and entered the Pacific Ocean during September 12. After entering the Pacific Ocean, the wave encountered a favourable environment for tropical cyclogenesis, with very warm waters of around 29–30 °C (84–86 °F) and relatively light vertical wind shear. As a result, the system started to organise and developed a closed circulation, before the United States National Hurricane Center (NHC) initiated advisories and designated the disturbance as Tropical Depression Sixteen-E during September 16. At this time the system was located about 310 miles (500 km) to the south of Acapulco, Mexico and had started to be steered towards the west-northwest, as a result of a ridge of high pressure over northern Mexico. During that day, deep atmospheric convection surrounding the depression increased, before the NHC reported that the system had intensified into a tropical storm and named it Nora.
Over the next couple of days, the newly named system moved north-westwards over the Pacific Ocean as it continued to intensify, before satellite imagery showed that Nora had started to develop an eye early on September 18. During that day, Nora peaked as a Category 2 hurricane on the Saffir–Simpson hurricane wind scale, with 1-minute sustained wind speeds estimated at 105 miles per hour (165 km/h). Over the next couple of days, the hurricane became near-stationary over cooler waters, after a storm system over the Western United States, likely eroded the western part of the high-pressure area. As a result, atmospheric convection surrounding the system decreased, while Nora weakened into a Category 1 hurricane and its eye disappeared from satellite imagery. The storm system subsequently moved into the United States Midwest and allowed the ridge of high pressure to rebuild, which enabled Nora to start moving towards the west-northwest, parallel to Mexico's western coast during September 20. As the system moved towards the west-northwest, the hurricane started to restrengthen and went through a period of rapid intensification, as cloud tops cooled and the eye reappeared on satellite imagery. Nora peaked as a Category 4 hurricane at around 04:00 Pacific Standard Time (PST) (1200 UTC) on September 21, with winds estimated at 130 mph (215 km/h) and a minimum pressure of 950 hectopascals (28.05 inHg).
After peaking in intensity for the second time, Nora started to gradually weaken, as it moved over waters that Hurricane Linda had passed over and cooled a few weeks earlier. During September 22, the system passed near or over Socorro in the Revillagigedo Islands, as a Category 3 hurricane with maximum sustained winds of 125 mph (205 km/h). Over the next couple of days, Nora continued to weaken but maintained hurricane status as it moved north-westwards, while a trough of low pressure developed to the northwest of the hurricane. The flow from the trough caused the hurricane to turn and accelerate northwards during September 24, before it made landfall near Punta Eugenia, Baja California at about 22:30 PST on September 24 (06:30 UTC, September 25). The system moved out into the Sebastián Vizcaíno Bay a few hours later before it made another landfall at about 03:00 PST (11:00 UTC) to the south-southeast of San Fernando, Baja California as a Category 1 hurricane. As Nora continued to move northwards, satellite imagery observed a rapid weakening of the system, before it skirted the western shoreline of the Gulf of California to the north of San Felipe. The system subsquently made landfall near the mouth of the Colorado river, before it entered the Continental United States, just to the west of Yuma, Arizona at around 13:00 PST (21:00 UTC). The system was last noted during the next day after it had degenerated into a tropical depression, as its low-level circulation centre moved towards the north-northeast and dissipated. The upper-level circulation persisted for another couple of days and interacted with a frontal system, as it moved through portions of Utah, Colorado, Idaho and Wyoming before it dissipated on September 28.
Preparations and Impact
Hurricane Nora impacted the majority of Mexico's Pacific-facing coast, as well as parts of the Southwestern United States, including California, Arizona, Utah and New Mexico. Overall the system was responsible for two deaths in Mexico and either three or four fatalities in the United States, as well as at least $150 million in damages. Nora's threat to the Southwestern United States was considered unusual and required an unprecedented coordination effort, between NHC and various National Weather Service Forecast Offices in the Western United States.
Mexico
Nora's precursor system and an upper-level low over the Gulf of Mexico, caused heavy rain in eastern Mexico, with rainfall totals of 10–15 inches (250–380 mm) reported to the west of Guatemala. After the system had become a tropical storm on September 16, the Mexican Government issued a hurricane watch and a tropical storm warning for parts of Jalisco, Colima, Michoacán and Guerrero. As a result, authorities set up evacuation centres on higher ground in case evacuations were ordered, while several major ports including Acapulco, Huatulco, Lazaro Cardenas and Zihuatanejo were closed to shipping or restricted to bigger vessels. Over the next couple of days, the tropical storm warning and hurricane watch was cancelled and replaced with a flood warnings by the Mexican Government. Despite the system remaining over open waters, parts of Guerrero reported experiencing gusty winds and heavy rain from Nora's outer bands. The system also produced high seas, high surf and waves of up to 4.9 m (16 ft), which impacted parts of southwestern Mexico. As a result, property along the coastline was damaged, trees were brought down, while substantial beach erosion was reported with the Pie de la Cuesta beach washed away.
During September 21, the Mexican Government issued a hurricane watch for the sparsely populated Revillagigedo Islands, before it was superseded by a hurricane warning later that day. Nora subsequently became the second hurricane in 10 days to pass near or over the island of Socorro, where winds of 50 mph (85 km/h) and a minimum pressure of 992.8 hPa (29.32 inHg) was reported. The system subsequently started to impact Cabo San Lucas on the Baja California peninsula with heavy rain, strong winds and 15 ft (4.6 m) waves. During September 23, the Mexican Government issued a hurricane watch for Baja California between Punta San Carlos and 25°N, as well as a tropical storm warning for areas to the south of 25°N. On September 24, the Mexican Government revised its warnings issued a hurricane warning for both sides of the Baja California Peninsula as well as a tropical storm warning and a hurricane watch for the coast of Sonora from Bahía Kino northwards.




About 350–400 people were left homeless by floodwaters in the town of Arroyo de Santa Catarina in northern Baja California. Heavy damage and flooding were reported in San Felipe, on the northwestern shore of the Gulf of California, as well as extensive beach erosion. Local roads and highways were destroyed and the town's dock was severely damaged.


500 people were evacuated from their homes near Cabo San Lucas, Baja California Sur, and placed in shelters to prepare for the storm's impact.
Baja
In the aftermath of the system, troops patrolled flooded streets in Mexicali.
Authorities ordered the evacuation of hundreds of people from flood-threatened coastal areas.
Another person was electrocuted by a downed power line in Mexicali.
The death of a diver who had been harvesting sea urchins of the San Quintin Valley and had died of Nitrogen narcosis, was partially attributed by Mexican authorities to strong underwater currents created by Nora.
Sonora
During September 24, tropical storm force winds of up to 75 mph (120 km/h), heavy rainfall and waves of up to 10 ft (3.0 m) were reported in Sonora.


A rainfall total of 20.94 inches (532 mm) was recorded in La Cruz.
In the town of Guaymas approximately 45 fishermen were evacuated from a small seaside camp.
At the height of the storm, approximately 300 people were staying in shelters at local schools.


Puerto Peñasco
Ahead of the system impacting the port city of Puerto Peñasco in Sonora, it was suggested that most people were calm about the threat posed by Nora with only a few people taking any precautions against the threat posed by flooding and strong winds. Officials advised 300 residents that they may need to evacuate and prepared local schools to act as shelters if needed. High winds 
Significant wind damage was subsequently reported within the city, with 


Nora's winds blew down trees, billboards, taco stands and ripped sheet metal from roofs.
As the system started to impact the city, officials turned off the electricity supply in Puerto Peñasco at about 10:00 PST (17:00 UTC), in order to protect the city from falling powerlines. However, the power was restored later that day.
United States
As Nora impacted Arizona and California, bird watchers observed and studied various rare seabirds, that were found along the Colorado River and the Salton Sea.
California
Nora was the third named storm to impact California during the 1997 Pacific hurricane season, after Tropical Storm Ignacio and Hurricane Linda had impacted the state earlier in the season. Tropical moisture associated with the system produced unseasonable rainfall over the state, with rainfall totals of between 0.13–4.70 in (3.3–119.4 mm) reported within the state. This caused several places to record their first significant rainfall since April 1997, while 0.27 in (6.9 mm) of rain fell on Los Angeles which ended a record-setting dry spell that had lasted since February 18. As a result of the rain, minor flooding was reported in the counties of Imperial, Inyo, Los Angeles, Orange, Riverside, San Bernardino, San Diego and Ventura.


On the highways of Los Angles and San Diego, the rain was responsible for over three times the usual amount of traffic accidents, while the California Highway Patrol attributed the deaths of three or four people to Nora's rain. 
also caused minor flooding throughout the state which caused extensive damage reported to crops including carrotts and cotton in Imperial County.


In the United States, there were no direct deaths blamed on the hurricane. However, the California Highway Patrol three or four traffic fatalities in southern California to the weather.
As a result, several highways in the Coachella and Borrego Valleys to be closed due to flooding, while hundreds of automobile accidents caused traffic jams throughout San Diego and Orange Counties.
Winds associated with Hurricane Nora did not significantly impact California, however, cool moist winds associated with the system stifled a wildfire, that was occurring on the Del-Dios highway.
Arizona
Hurricane Nora was the eighth tropical cyclone, fifth tropical storm and one of the strongest tropical cyclones on record to move into Arizona since 1965. Ahead of Nora impacting Arizona, it was predicted that the system could produce strong winds of between 55–60 mph (90–95 km/h) over the state, which was thought to be enough to cause patio furniture to go flying. The main threat though was thought to be from the rain, with rainfall totals of 2–5 in (51–127 mm) and isolated totals of 10 in (250 mm) expected in areas, where the average annual rainfall was about 3 in (76 mm). As a result, various weather and flood warnings were issued which caused the activation of various local and statewide response mechanisms, while concerns about flooding were very high in eastern Arizona after an unrelated storm had saturated the soils. These mechanisms included the declaration of a state of emergency for Yuma County by the then Governor of Arizona Jane Dee Hull, helicopters being placed on standby and the deployment of the Arizona National Guard to Yuma with various equipment. Residents of the state also took precautions as they stocked up on bottled water, food, flashlights and other emergency supplies, while others tied patio furniture and other potential missiles down. However, the Salt River Project refused to increase its flood storage capacities through emergency reservoir releases, as the reservoirs were nowhere near full and could cope with the expected flooding.
Nora moved into the state during September 25 as a weakening tropical storm and deviated from its forecast track, which meant that eastern and central parts of the state including Tuscon received only minimal rainfall and breezy conditions. Significant wind and flash flood damage were reported in the western parts of the state, with the system thought to have been responsible for around $150 to $200 million of damage to crops. As the system moved into the state, a 45 mi (75 km) band of hurricane-force winds was observed on the Yuma doppler radar near Arizona's border with Sonora, while strong winds of between 50–60 mph (80–95 km/h) were reported in Yuma. These winds tore off shingles and awnings from houses, while street signs and powerlines were blown away which in turn caused scattered power outages. Rainfall totals of between 0.03–11.97 inches (0.76–304.04 mm) were recorded within the state, which as a result caused widespread and significant flooding, rockslides and mudslides.


Three mobile homes were flooded in Vicksburg, one of which had a family inside, however, there were no casualties reported as all were rescued and put into an emergency shelter.
On September 25, the counties of La Paz and Mohave declared that an emergency existed in their counties.
Within Somerton, Yuma, 750 residents were evacuated from two mobile home parks, after rainfall from Nora generated 3 ft (0.91 m) of water.
During September 26, a torrent of water surged through Aguila after the system had dropped over 5 in (130 mm) of rain on the mountains of Western Arizona and caused two earthen dams to give way. As a result, around 300–500 acres (120–200 ha) of melons and approximately half of the cotton crop on the Martori Farms complex were destroyed, while 35 farm workers had to be evacuated to a middle school in Wickenburg from their homes on the farm. Maricopa County subsequently declared that an emergency existed in Aguila which allowed it to receive state funds.
Utah
Ahead of Nora impacting Utah, forecasters stated that it wasn't a good weekend to go hiking in the Utah's narrow canyons and predicted that the system could produce heavy rain and flooding over southern parts of the state. As a result of prior flooding in the state, sandbags were issued by emergency services in Kane and Washington County, while crews were sent out to check major drainage outlets and clean grates and inlets. As Nora started to impact the state during September 25, flash flood watches and warnings were issued for southern parts of the state, before high winds of near hurricane force and rainfall totals of between 0.25–3.30 in (6.4–83.8 mm) were observed. In particular, it was thought that the system was responsible for producing straight-line winds, which sheared the tops of approximately 400 trees off in the Dixie National Forest, Brian Head Ski Resort and the Cedar Breaks National Monument. The falling trees damaged three condominiums in Brian Head, injured a archaeologist camping in Cedar Breaks and disrupted the power supply in both areas. No major flooding was reported in Utah despite significant rises in washes and streams, however, minor flooding was reported in Rockville across Utah State Route 9. It was later estimated that Nora had caused a total of $108 thousand to crops and property in Utah.
Other states
On September 23, the American Red Cross chapter in New Mexico issued a media release, which stated that Nora would produce 6–12 in (150–300 mm) of rain over the state. They also announced that it was prepared to open shelters for residents and emergency workers, who might evacuate or be caught up in the system. The Red Cross later acknowledged that these estimates were made in error after they had misinterpreted information from the National Red Cross about the impact of the system. Forecasters from the National Weather Service predicted that the remnants might produce up to 2 in (51 mm) of rain in the northwest of the state, while eastern and central parts of the state might see some showers or no rain at all from Nora.
Within Nevada, rainfall totals of between 0.34–3.25 in (8.6–82.6 mm) were reported. At the same time, minor street flooding was also reported in parts of Las Vegas and the Pahrump Valley, which caused access to some homes to be cut off as flooded roads became impassable.