Iban language
The Iban language (jaku Iban) is spoken by the Iban, a branch of the Dayak ethnic group, who live in Brunei, the Indonesian province of West Kalimantan and in the Malaysian state of Sarawak. It belongs to the Malayic languages, a Malayo-Polynesian branch of the Austronesian language family.
Classification
Iban is classified as a Malayic language, a Malayo-Polynesian branch of the Austronesian language family. The language is closely related to Malay, more closely to Sarawakian Malay. It is thought that the homeland of the Malayic languages is in western Borneo, where the Ibanic languages remain. The Malayan branch represents a secondary dispersal, probably from central Sumatra but possibly also from Borneo.
Background
The Iban language is the native language of the Iban people, who fall under the general grouping of "Dayak" (i.e. native peoples of Borneo). Previously, the Iban were referred to during the colonial period as "Sea Dayaks". Their homeland is the island of Borneo, which is politically divided between Malaysia and Indonesia; the Iban can mostly be found in the Malaysian state of Sarawak.
The language is mostly taught to students in rural areas with a majority Iban population, including Baleh (Kapit), Betong, Sri Aman, Saratok, Lubok Antu, Pelagus (Kapit), Pakan and Julau. In big cities like Kuching, only a small number of schools teach Iban. This is due to the limited number of teachers who are capable of teaching it. Form 5 and Form 3 students are allowed to take Iban in their SPM & PT3 exam.
Dialects
Iban can be subdivided into different sub-ethnic groups, each of which speak in different dialects. The most formal, intermediate, and working dialect is the Saribas dialect, and mainly Betong and Saratok. Others such as Balau, Sebuyau, Ulu Ai, and Rejang are mutually intelligible throughout the Sarawak region. The exception is the Iban Remun/Milikin dialect, which is still understood by Ibans from other districts. In West Kalimantan, dialects such as Bugau, Seberuang, Mualang, Chengkang, Sebaru, and Dau are more disparate. 
Dialect comparison
Sample phases in Iban Remun
Phonology
Consonants
Iban has the following consonant inventory:
Vowels
Iban has a six-vowel system, with five cardinal vowels plus schwa:
Vowel sounds are nasalized when preceded by a nasal consonant.
Writing system
Although the Iban language is presently written using the Latin alphabet, an Iban syllabary (the Dunging script) was devised by Dunging anak Gunggu, who reportedly spent fifteen years from 1947 to 1962 devising the script. Twenty generations before Dunging, which would represent approximately 400–600 years, an ancestor named Renggi also devised a script, but it was apparently lost in a flood. The Iban syllabary is published but is not widely distributed; efforts by Dr. Bromeley Philip of Universiti Teknologi MARA to promote and revitalize the use of script have resulted in the creation of digital fonts in 2010, called LaserIban. His aim is to help preserve the Iban alphabet in digital form in the modern world. The LaserIban font is available for Windows and Macintosh computers and is completely cross-platform compatible. His work has also led to the creation of a teaching program and the transcription of several traditional folktales.
Grammar
Lexical roots can be expanded by many affixes in Iban, as exemplified here with the verb gagai.
There are four types of affixes in Iban, namely prefixes, suffixes, circumfixes and infixes.
Other examples:
Personal pronouns
Iban has separate words for inclusive and exclusive we, and distinguishes singular, dual, and plural.
Sample
Pronouns are primarily put after subjects.
Possessive pronouns
Sample phases:
Demonstrative determiners
There are three demonstrative determiners in Iban. Tu 'this, these' is used for a noun which is generally near to the speaker, nya 'that, those' is used for a noun which is generally far from the speaker, and nyin, which is the furthest from the speaker.
These words can also act as demonstrative pronouns where they can stands on theirs own, replacing rather than modifying a noun.
Example:
Demonstrative pronouns
In Iban, demonstrative pronouns are words that show which person or thing is being referred in relation to the location of the addressee to the speaker. There are three demonstrative pronouns in Iban depending on location to the speaker. They can only be used to refer to an addressee (human) and cannot be used to refer to inanimate objects.
Examples:
Demonstrative adverbs
Demonstrative adverbs in Iban are closely related to the demonstrative pronouns in Iban grammar. For example, corresponding to the demonstrative pronouns are the adverbs such as kitu ('going here'), kia ('going there') and kin ('going there (farthest)') equivalent adverbs corresponding to the demonstrative pronoun this are tu, nya and nyin. 
Examples:
Locatives
Examples:


Manner
Iban also has a set of adverbs referring to manner. They are a combination of baka (ke) ('like/as') and the abbreviated determiner forms tu, nya and nyin.
Examples:
Interrogative words
Iban also has a few interrogative words: sapa, nama, ni, lapa, kemaya and berapa.
Sapa
Who
empu
own
jam
watch
tu?
this
Sapa empu jam tu?
Who own watch this
Who owns this watch?
Nama
What
gaga
doing
nuan
you
ditu?
here
Nama gaga nuan ditu?
What doing you here
What are you doing here?
Ni
Where
ai
water/drink
ku
my
tadi?
just now
Ni ai ku tadi?
Where water/drink my {just now}
Where is my drink?
Lapa
Why
nuan
you
nyabak?
crying
Lapa nuan nyabak?
Why you crying
Why are you crying?
Kemaya
When
tua
we
deka
going to
betemu?
meet
Kemaya tua deka betemu?
When we {going to} meet
When are we going to meet?
Berapa
How many
iku
CL
manuk
chicken
tupi
raise
nuan?
you
Berapa iku manuk tupi nuan?
{How many} CL chicken raise you
How many chicken you raise?
Bakani
How
gaya
look
mua ari
weather
saritu?
today
Bakani gaya {mua ari} saritu?
How look weather today
How is the weather today?
Examples
Family
For extended family in Iban
Example;
Days
Example:
Months
The Iban calendar is one month ahead of the Gregorian calendar as follows:
References
Sources