ICICI Bank
ICICI Bank Limited is an Indian Private bank. It is headquartered at Mumbai. It offers a wide range of banking products and financial services for corporate and retail customers through a variety of delivery channels and specialized subsidiaries in the areas of investment banking, life, non-life insurance, venture capital and asset management.


This development finance institution has a network of 5,275 branches and 15,589 ATMs across India and has a presence in 17 countries. The bank has subsidiaries in the United Kingdom and Canada; branches in United States, Singapore, Bahrain, Hong Kong, Qatar, Oman, Dubai International Finance Centre, China and South Africa; as well as representative offices in United Arab Emirates, Bangladesh, Malaysia and Indonesia. The company's UK subsidiary has also established branches in Belgium and Germany.
History
The Industrial Credit and Investment Corporation of India (ICICI) was established on 5 January 1955 and Sir Arcot Ramasamy Mudaliar was elected as the first Chairman of ICICI Ltd. It was structured as a joint-venture of the World Bank, India's public-sector banks and public-sector insurance companies to provide project financing to Indian industry. ICICI Bank was established by ICICI, as a wholly owned subsidiary in 1994 in Vadodara. The bank was founded as the Industrial Credit and Investment Corporation of India Bank, before it changed its name to ICICI Bank. The parent company was later merged with the bank.
In the 1990s, ICICI transformed its business from a development financial institution offering only project finance to a diversified financial services group, offering a wide variety of products and services, both directly and through a number of subsidiaries and affiliates like ICICI Bank. ICICI's shareholding in ICICI Bank was reduced to 46% through a public offering of shares in India in 1998, followed by an equity offering in the form of American depositary receipts on the NYSE in 2000. ICICI Bank acquired the Bank of Madura Limited in an all-stock deal in 2001 and sold additional stakes to institutional investors during 2001–02. ICICI Bank launched Internet Banking operations in 1998.
In 1999, ICICI become the first Indian company and the first bank or a financial institution from non-Japan Asia to be listed on the NYSE.
ICICI, ICICI Bank, and ICICI subsidiaries ICICI Personal Financial Services Limited and ICICI Capital Services Limited merged in a reverse merger in 2002. During the financial crisis of 2007–2008, customers rushed to ICICI ATMs and branches in some locations due to rumors of bank failure. The Reserve Bank of India issued a clarification on the financial strength of ICICI Bank to dispel the rumours.
In March 2020, the board of ICICI Bank Ltd. approved an investment of ₹10 billion (US$130 million) in Yes Bank, resulting in a 5% ownership interest in Yes.
Acquisitions
Role in Indian financial infrastructure
ICICI bank has contributed to the setting up of a number of Indian institutions to establish financial infrastructure in the country over the years:
Products
ICICI Bank offers products and services such as online money transfers, tracking services, current accounts, savings accounts, time deposits, recurring deposits, mortgages, loans, automated lockers, credit cards, prepaid cards, debit cards and digital wallets called ICICI pocket.
ICICI bank launched 'ICICIStack' which provides online services such as payment options, digital accounts, instant car loans, insurance, investments, loans etc.
Subsidiaries
ICICI Bank Canada
ICICI Bank Canada is a wholly owned subsidiary of ICICI Bank, whose corporate office is located in Toronto. Established in December 2003, ICICI Bank Canada is a full-service direct bank with assets of about $6.5 billion as of 31 December 2019. It is governed by Canada's Bank Act and operates under the supervision of the Office of the Superintendent of Financial Institutions. The bank has seven branches in Canada.
In 2003, ICICI Bank Canada was established as a Schedule II (foreign-owned or -controlled) bank. It was incorporated in November and opened its head office and downtown Toronto branch in December. In 2004 launched an online banking platform. In 2005, it launched its financial advisor services channel. In 2008, the bank relocated its corporate office to the Don Valley Business Park in Toronto. In 2010, it launched a mortgage broker service. In 2014, the bank launched a mobile banking app.
ICICI Bank Canada is a member of several esteemed trade association; as well as the Canadian Bankers Association (CBA); a registered member with the Canada Deposit Insurance Corporation (CDIC), a federal agency insuring deposits at all of Canada's chartered banks; Interac Association; Cirrus Network; and The Exchange Network.
ICICI Bank UK PLC
ICICI Bank UK PLC was incorporated in England and Wales on 11 February 2003, as a private company with the name ICICI Bank UK Ltd. It then became a public limited company on 30 October 2006. Presently the Bank has seven branches in the UK. : one each in Birmingham, East Ham, Harrow, London, Manchester, Southall and Wembley.
The bank currently has seven branches in the UK. ICICI Bank UK PLC is authorised by the Prudential Regulation Authority and regulated by the Financial Conduct Authority and Prudential Regulation Authority. It is covered by the Financial Services Compensation Scheme (FSCS). The bank has a long-term foreign currency credit rating of Baa1 from Moody's. At 31 March 2019, it had a capital adequacy ratio of 16.8%.
ICICI Bank UK PLC offers products and services such as a current account, savings account, remittance to India, safe deposit box, NRI Services, business banking, foreign exchange services, commercial real estate and corporate banking. In 2019, ICICI Bank UK PLC launched an instant account opening facility through its iMobile app.
ICICI Bank Regional Subsidiaries
ICICI Bank has operations in Bahrain, Germany, Europe, Hong Kong, and China in addition to the countries mentioned above.
Controversies
Inhumane debt recovery methods
A few years after its rise to prominence in the banking sector, ICICI bank faced allegations on the recovery methods it used against loan payment defaulters. A number of cases were filed against the bank and its employees for using "brutal measures" to recover the money. Most of the allegations were that the bank was using goons to recover the credit card payments and that these "recovery agents" exhibited inappropriately and in some cases, inhuman behaviour. Incidents were reported wherein the defaulters were put to "public shame" by the recovery agents.
The bank also faced allegations of inappropriate behaviour in recovering its loans. These allegations started initially when the "recovery agents" and bank employees started threatening the defaulters. In some cases, notes were written by the bank's employees asking the defaulters to "sell everything in the house including family members", were found. Such charges faced by the bank rose to a peak when suicide cases were reported wherein the suicide notes spoke of the bank's recovery methods as the cause of the suicide. This led to legal battles and the bank paying huge compensation.
Money laundering allegations
ICICI Bank was one of the leading Indian banks accused of blatant money laundering through violation of RBI guidelines in the famous CobraPost sting operation which shook up Indian banking industry during April–May 2013.
On 14 March 2013 the online magazine Cobrapost released video footage from Operation Red Spider showing high-ranking officials and some employees of ICICI Bank agreeing to convert black money into white, an act in violation of Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002. The Government of India and Reserve Bank of India ordered an inquiry following the exposé. On 15 March 2013, ICICI Bank suspended 18 employees, pending inquiry. On 11 April 2013 the Deputy Governor of RBI, H R Khan reportedly said that the central bank was initiating action against ICICI Bank in connection with allegations of money laundering.
Chanda Kochhar fraud case
On 4 October 2018, the then MD & CEO Chanda Kochhar stepped down from her position following allegations of corruption. In January 2019, based on the report of an enquiry panel headed by Justice Srikrishna, the bank board officially terminated her from service. It also become one of the first in the country to ask for a claw back of bonuses and benefits. In 2020 the Enforcement Directorate provisionally seized assets and shares belonging to Chanda Kochhar with an estimated value of more than ₹780 million (US$9.8 million), in relation to the ICICI bank loan case.