Iman (Islam)
Iman (إِيمَان ʾīmān, lit. faith or belief, also recognition) in Islamic theology denotes a believer's 
recognition in faith and deeds in the religious aspects of Islam. Its most simple definition is the belief in the six articles of faith, known as arkān al-īmān.
The term iman has been delineated in both the Quran and hadith. According to the Quran, iman must be accompanied by righteous deeds and the two together are necessary for entry into Paradise. In the hadith, iman in addition to Islam and ihsan form the three dimensions of the Islamic religion.
There exists a debate both within and outside Islam on the link between faith and reason in religion, and the relative importance of either. Some scholars contend that faith and reason spring from the same source and hence must be harmonious.
Etymology
In Arabic, iman (إِيمَان ʾīmān) pronounced [ˈʔiː.maːn] means "faith" or "recognition". It is the verbal noun of آمَنَ, "to have faith" or "to give recognition."
Definition and meaning
In a hadith, the Islamic prophet Muhammad defined iman as "an acknowledge in the heart, a voicing with the tongue, and an activity with the limbs." Faith is confidence in a truth which is real. When people have confidence, they submit themselves to that truth. It is not sufficient just to know the truth, but the recognition of the heart should be expressed by the tongue which is the manifestation of the intelligence and at last to reflect this confidence in their activities.
Hamiduddin Farahi, while explaining the meaning of imān in his exegesis, wrote:
The definition of Iman according to Ahl al-Sunnah wa’l-Jama’ah is: 
The Six Articles of Faith
Faith (iman) includes six primary beliefs:

Of these, the first four are mentioned and the sixth implied in ayah 2:285 of the Quran. All six appear in the first hadith of the collection Sahih Muslim, where the angel Gabriel asks to be told of iman and Muhammad replies: 


Another similar narration ascribed to Muhammad is: 
Delineation in the Qur'an and Hadith
In the Qur'an, iman is one of the 10 qualities which cause one to be the recipient of God's mercy and reward. The Qur'an states that faith can grow with the remembrance of God. The Qur'an also states that nothing in this world should be dearer to a true believer than faith.
Muhammad is reported to have said that he gained sweetness of faith who was pleased to accept God as Lord, Islam as religion and Muhammad as prophet. He also said that no one can be a true believer unless he loves Muhammad more than his children, parents and relatives. At another instance, he has remarked that it is this love with Allah and Muhammad after which a person can be aware of the real taste of faith.
Amin Ahsan Islahi, a notable exegete of the Qur'an has clarified the nature of this love:
Islahi and Abul A'la Maududi both have inferred that the Quranic comparison of a good word and a bad word in Chapter 14 is actually a comparison of faith and disbelief. Thus, the Quran is effectively comparing faith to a tree whose roots are deep in the soil and branches spread in the vastness of the sky.
Iman is also the subject of a supplication uttered by Muhammad to God:
The Seventy-Seven Branches of Faith
"The Seventy-Seven Branches of Faith" is a collection compiled by the Shafiʽi imam al-Bayhaqi in his work Shu'ab al-Iman. In it, he explains the essential virtues that reflect true Iman (faith and recognition) through related Quranic verses and prophetic sayings.
This is based on the following Hadith ascribed to Muhammad:
These 77 branches described by Bayhaqi are:  
Faith and deeds
In Islam, it is essential that there exist harmony and concord between faith and deeds. Farāhī has explained this aspect in his tafsīr in the following manner:
Faith and reason in Islam
The relation between reason and faith in Islam is a complex debate spanning over centuries. Ismail Raji al-Faruqi states on this subject: