Indian passport
An Indian passport is a passport issued by the Ministry of External Affairs of the Republic of India to Indian citizens for the purpose of international travel. It enables the bearer to travel internationally and serves as proof of Indian citizenship as per the Passports Act (1967). The Passport Seva (Passport Service) unit of the Consular, Passport & Visa (CPV) Division of the Ministry of External Affairs functions as the issuing authority and is responsible for issuing Indian passports on application to all eligible Indian citizens. Indian passports are issued at 93 passport offices located across India and at 197 Indian diplomatic missions abroad.


In 2015, India issued about 12 million passports, ranking third only after China and the United States of America. Approximately 65 million Indians held valid passports as of the end of 2015.
As of 12 December 2022, only 7.2 percent (approximately 96 million) of the total Indian citizens possessed a valid passport with Kerala having the highest number of passport holders among all Indian states. Previously, passports were not popular among the masses due to time consuming and complicated process and lesser access to the Passport facilitation centres located only in major cities. With the expansion of centres and technological upgradation accompanied with increased outsourcing of professionals and an expanding middle-class, the percentage is expected to go up.
History
British Raj
British Indian passports were issued to British subjects of the British Indian Empire, as well as to British subjects from other parts of the British Empire, and subjects of the British protected states in India (i.e. British protected persons of the 'princely states'). These passports were introduced in British India after the First World War. The Indian Passport Act of 1920 required the use of passports, established controls on the foreign travel of Indians, and foreigners travelling to and within India. The passport was based on the format agreed upon by the 1920 League of Nations International Conference on Passports. However, the British Indian passport had very limited usage, being valid for travel only within the British Empire, Italy, Switzerland, Austria, Czechoslovakia, Germany, France, Spain, Norway, Sweden and Holland.
Dominion of India
The use of the passport was discontinued after the establishment of the dominions of India and Pakistan in 1947, and its bearers were entitled to opt for Indian, Pakistani or British nationality.
Passport laws were made strict in both the countries in 1952.  Initially, Indian passports were granted only to "respectable" people. A literacy test was required, and passports were denied to Communist Party of India members. Only in 1967 did the Supreme Court rule that every citizen had the right to a passport.
Types of passport
In addition, selected passport offices in India as well as overseas missions were authorised to issue regular India-Bangladesh Passport to Indian nationals resident in West Bengal and the North-Eastern States, India-Sri Lanka Passport to Indian nationals resident in Tamil Nadu and Puducherry and the India-Pakistan Passport to Indian nationals whose ancestral homes lay on the other side of the Radcliffe Line. These three passports respectively permitted travel to Bangladesh, Sri Lanka and Pakistan only and were not valid for travel to other foreign countries. Both India and Bangladesh stopped issuing the Indo-Bangladesh Passport in 2013 due to changes in ICAO regulations.
Tatkaal and SVP
Tatkaal Passports (for urgent needs), and Short Validity Passport (SVP) are also available and these are likely considered Ordinary Passports once issued.
e-Passports
The need for e-Passports (or Biometric passport) in India was realised in the late 2010s. Till early 2022, the government issued 20,000 official and diplomatic e-passports, but not to ordinary citizens of India. The government had issued the first e-passport to former President of India, Pratibha Patil in 2008.
The Union government officially announced to roll out e-passports on the lines of international standards for Indian citizens in the 2022-23 fiscal year. The Union Finance Minister Nirmala Sitharaman announced the same during the Union Budget 2022 address to the Loksabha. ICAO compliant passports with embedded electronic chip and digital inlays have been aimed for speedy immigration checks and high security. For the roll out of e-Passports, the Ministry of External Affairs entered into a contract with the Tata Consultancy Services. This has been officially termed as Passport Seva Programme V2.0.
Physical appearance
Early passports dating back to the British Empire were handwritten, including some issued between 1997 and 2000 with 20-year validity dates. These passports have been ruled invalid by the Indian government and holders must replace them with machine-readable versions with validity for 10 years due to ICAO regulations.
Versions prior to 2021 had deep bluish cover with golden coloured printing. The Emblem of India emblazoned in the center of the front cover. The words भारत गणराज्य in Devanagari and REPUBLIC OF INDIA were inscribed below the Emblem whereas पासपोर्ट in Devanagari and PASSPORT in English were inscribed above the emblem.
The latest version of 2021 has the official name of the country and "Passport" engravings' positions changed mutually. The passport has the passport number perforated. The pages have been re-designed.
The standard passport contains 36 pages, but frequent travellers can opt for a passport containing 60 pages.
Identity Information Page
Passport note
All passports contain a note in Hindi and English, nominally from the President of India, addressing the authorities of all countries and territories:
The note bearing page is typically stamped and signed by the issuing authority in the name of the President of the Republic of India.
Languages
The text of Indian Passport is printed in Hindi and English, two of the twenty two scheduled official languages (as per Eighth Schedule to the Constitution of India) at the Union level.
Emigration check
Holders of Emigration Check Required (ECR) type passports need a clearance called an Emigration Check from the Government of India's Protector of Emigrants when going to selected countries on a work visa. This is to prevent the exploitation of Indian workers (especially the unskilled and less-educated) when going abroad, particularly to Middle Eastern countries. ECR type passport holders travelling on a tourist visa do not need a clearance; this is known as an Emigration Check Suspension.
Emigration Check Not Required (ECNR) status passports are granted to:
In accordance with a ruling by the Ministry of External Affairs, passports issued from 2007 onwards do not have the ECNR stamp affixed; instead, a blank page 2 of the passport is deemed to have been ECNR endorsed. As a result, only ECR stamps are now affixed to Indian passports. For passports issued before January 2007, no notation in the passport means ECR. For passports issued in or after January 2007, no notation in the passport means ECNR. If Emigration Check is Required, there will be an endorsement in the passport regarding ECR.
Features
Since 25 November 2015, Indian passports that are handwritten or with an original date of expiry extending to 20 years have not been valid under ICAO travel regulations. With more recent Indian passports the personal particulars of the passport holder, that were hitherto printed on the inner cover page, are printed on the second page of the document. Another added security feature in the newer non-handwritten passports is a ghost picture of the holder found on the right side of the second page. Apart from stymieing criminals from printing fake passports, recent changes also help prevent smudging of the document because of inkjet printers.
Fees
The price for a standard passport in India:
Indian passports can also be issued outside India, for which fees varies by country.
Issuance
Passport Seva Kendra
In September 2007, the Indian Union Council of Ministers approved a new passport issuance system under the Passport Seva Project. As per the project, front-end activities of passport issuance, dispatch of passports, online linking with police, and Central Printing Unit for centralised printing of passports will be put in place. The new system is trying to be 'timely, transparent, more accessible and reliable manner' for passport issuance. The applicant has to apply for fresh/reissue of passport through the Passport Seva system at one of the 77 Passport offices known as "Passport Seva Kendra"s operating throughout the country.
Biometric passport
India initiated the first phase of biometric e-passport for Diplomatic passport holders in India and abroad. The new passports have been designed locally by the Central Passport Organisation, the India Security Press and IIT Kanpur. It contains a security chip with all personal data and digital images. In the first phase new passports will have a 64KB chip carrying a photograph of the passport holder and in subsequent phases it will have a fingerprint. The new passport has already been tested with passport readers in the United States and has 4-second response time, while the US Passport has 10-second response time. It need not be carried in a metal jacket for security reasons. It will first need to be skimmed through a reader, after which it would generate an access code which then unlocks the chip for reader access.
In India, the e-passport is under its first phase of deployment and is restricted to Diplomatic passport holders. On 25 June 2008 the Indian Passport Authority issued the e-passport to the then President of India Pratibha Patil. As of 2016, the Government has plans to issue e-passports to all of its citizens. Also the Government has authorized Indian Security Press to float a global three-stage tender for procurement of ICAO-compliant electronic contactless inlays along with its operating system, which is required for the manufacture of Biometric Passports. The necessary procurement have been initiated by India Security Press, Nasik by calling for Global tender for the supply of electronic contactless inlays. The actual transition to the new age passport is expected to commence on the successful completion of the tendering and procurement process. The Biometric E-Passport work is currently in progress/pipeline and is yet to be available for Ordinary Passport holders.
During the 2022 Union budget of India speech, Finance minister Nirmala Sitharaman announced that e-Passports with embedded chip and futuristic technology will be rolled out in 2022-23. It contains microchips that would have important security data stored in them, which enhances the convenience of citizens in their overseas travel. The Ministry of External Affairs has stated that the digital passport will allow greater security for personal data as well as smoother immigration process.
Passport power and visa requirements
Visa requirements for Indian citizens are administrative entry restrictions by the authorities of other states placed on citizens of India.
Passport Power Ranking and visa-free travel
As of January 2022, Henley Passport Index ranks Indian passport at 83rd place with visa-free or visa on arrival access to 60 nations and territories to Indian citizens. As of December 2022, The Passport Index ranks Indian passport at 69th place on global ranking with 72 mobility ranking (based on visa-free or visa on arrival access to nations or territories). Minister of State for External Affairs V. Muraleedharan in his reply to an unstarred question in Rajya Sabha in November 2019 stated that the rank of the Indian passport on the Henley Passport Index is expected to improve.

Furthermore, Indian citizens may live and work freely in Nepal under the terms of the 1950 Indo-Nepal Treaty of Peace and Friendship.
Foreign travel statistics
According to the statistics these are the numbers of Indian visitors to various countries in 2017 (unless otherwise noted)