Jaw harp
The Jaw harp, also known as Jew's harp, Juice harp, mouth harp, ağız kopuzu (Turkey), Angkouch (Cambodia), Berimbau de boca, Brumle (Czechoslovakia), Changu (Sindhi), Đàn môi (Vietnam), Doromb (Hungary), Drymba (Ukraine), gewgaw, Gogona (Assam), Karinding (Sundanese), Khomus (Siberia), Kouxian (China), Kubing (Philippines), Guimbard (France), Marranzano (Sicily, Italy), Maultrommel (Austria/Germany), Mondharp/Munnharpe (Norway), Morchang (Rajasthan, North India), morsing (South India), Mukkuri (Japan), Mungiga, Murchunga/Binayo (Nepali), Ozark harp (USA), Parmupill (Estonia), Trump (Scotland), or Vargan(Russia), is a lamellophone instrument, consisting of a flexible metal or bamboo tongue or reed attached to a frame. Contrary to the name, the harp originated in China and has no relation to the Jewish people.
Jaw harps may be categorized as idioglot or heteroglot (whether or not the frame and the tine are one piece); by the shape of the frame (rod or plaque); by the number of tines, and whether the tines are plucked, joint-tapped, or string-pulled.
Characteristics
The frame is held firmly against the performer's parted teeth or lips (depending on the type), using the jaw and mouth as a resonator, greatly increasing the volume of the instrument. The teeth must be parted sufficiently for the reed to vibrate freely, and the fleshy parts of the mouth should not come into contact with the reed to prevent damping of the vibrations and possible pain. The note or tone thus produced is constant in pitch, though by changing the shape of the mouth, and the amount of air contained in it (and in some traditions closing the glottis), the performer can cause different overtones to sound and thus create melodies..


According to the Encyclopædia Britannica Eleventh Edition, "The vibrations of the steel tongue produce a compound sound composed of a fundamental and its harmonics. By using the cavity of the mouth as a resonator, each harmonic in succession can be isolated and reinforced, giving the instrument the compass shown."
"The lower harmonics of the series cannot be obtained, owing to the limited capacity of the resonating cavity. The black notes on the stave show the scale which may be produced by using two harps, one tuned a fourth above the other. The player on the Jew's harp, in order to isolate the harmonics, frames his mouth as though intending to pronounce the various vowels." See: bugle scale.
History
The earliest depiction of somebody playing what seems to be a Jaw harp is a Chinese drawing from the 3rd century BCE, and curved bones discovered in the Shimao fortifications in Shaanxi, China are believed to be the earliest evidence of its existence, dating back to before 1800 BCE. Archaeological finds of surviving examples in Europe have been claimed to be almost as old, but those dates have been challenged both on the grounds of excavation techniques, and the lack of contemporary writing or pictures mentioning the instrument.
Etymology
There are many theories for the origin of the name jew's harp. The apparent reference to Jews or to the Jewish people, is especially misleading since it "has nothing to do with the Jewish people; neither does it look like a harp in its structure and appearance". In Sicilian it is translated as Marranzanu or Mariolu"; both of which are derogatory terms for Jews and also found in Italian and Spanish. In German, it is known as Maultrommel, which roughly translates as 'mouth drum'. According to the Oxford English Dictionary, this name appears earliest in Walter Raleigh's Discouerie Guiana in 1596, spelled "Iewes Harp". The "jaw" variant is attested at least as early as 1774 and 1809, the "juice" variant appeared only in the late 19th and 20th centuries.
It has also been suggested that the name derives from the French jeu-trompe meaning 'toy trumpet'. The current French word for the instrument is guimbarde. Wedgwood, an English etymologist, wrote in 1855 that the derivation from jeu harpe opposes the French idiom, where "if two substantives are joined together, the qualifying noun is invariably the last. He refers to the jeu harpe derivation, but not to the jeu tromp derivation.
Both theories—that the name is a corruption of jaws or jeu—are described by the OED as "lacking any supporting evidence." The OED says that, "more or less satisfactory reasons may be conjectured: e.g. that the instrument was actually made, sold, or imported to England by Jews, or purported to be so; or that it was attributed to Jewish people, suggesting the trumps and harps mentioned in the Bible, and hence considered a good commercial name." The OED also states that "the association of the instrument with Jewish people occurs, so far as is known, only in English." However, the term is also used in Danish as jødeharpe.
Use
Cambodian music
The angkouch (Khmer: អង្គួច) is a Cambodian Jaw harp. It is a folk instrument made of bamboo and carved into a long, flat shape with a hole in the center and the tongue across the hole. There is also a metal variety, more round or tree-leaf shaped. It may also have metal bells attached. The instrument is both a wind instrument and percussion instrument. As a wind instrument, it is placed against the mouth, which acts as a resonator and tool to alter the sound. Although mainly a folk instrument, better-made examples exist. While the instrument was thought to be the invention of children herding cattle, it is sometimes used in public performance, to accompany the Mahori music in public dancing.
Indian Classical music
The instrument is used as part of the rhythm section in various styles of Indian folk and classical music. Most notably the Morsing in the Carnatic music of South India, or the Morchang in the lok geet (folk music) of Rajasthan.
Murchunga
In Nepal, one type of jaw harp is named the murchunga (Nepali: मुर्चुङ्गा). It is very similar to an Indian morsing or morchang in that the tongue (or twanger) extends beyond the frame, thus giving the instrument more sustain.
Binayo
The binayo (Nepali बिनायो बाजा) is a bamboo jaw harp, in the Kiranti musical tradition from Malingo. It is popular in the Eastern Himalayan region of Sikkim, Darjeeling Nepal and Bhutan. It is a wind instrument played by blowing the air without tuning the node with fingers. The binayo is six inches long and one inch in width.
Kyrgyz music
The temir komuz is made of iron, usually with a length of 100–200 mm and with a width of approximately 2–7 mm. The range of the instrument varies with the size of the instrument but generally hovers around an octave span. The Kyrgyz people are exceptionally proficient on the instrument and it is quite popular among children, although some adults continue to play the instrument. A national artist from the Kyrgyz Republic performs on the instrument. Twenty Kyrgyz girls have played in a temir komuz ensemble on the stage of the Bolshoi Theater in Moscow. Temir komuz pieces were notated by Aleksandr Zataevich in two or three parts. An octave drone is possible, or even an ostinato alternating the fifth step of a scale with an octave.
Turkish music

In Turkish, the Jaw harp is called as ağız kopuzu. The Jaw harp traditionally used in Turkish folk songs from Anatolia has fallen out of use with time.  Modern renditions of Turkish folk songs with the Jaw harp have been done by artists such as Senem Diyici in the song 'Dolama Dolamayı' and Ravan Yuzkhan.
Sindhi music
In Sindhi the Jaw harp is called changu (چنگُ). In Sindhi music, it can be an accompaniment or the main instrument. One of the most famous players is Amir Bux Ruunjho.
Sicilian music
In Sicily, the Jaw harp is commonly known as marranzano, but other names include angalarruni, calarruni, gangalarruni, ganghilarruni, mariolu, mariolu di fera, marranzana, and ngannalarruni.
Austrian Jaw harp playing
Austrian Jaw harp music uses typical Western harmony. The UNESCO has included Austrian Jaw harp playing in its Intangible Cultural Heritage list.
In Austria, the instrument is known as Maultrommel (the literal translation is 'mouth drum').
Western classical music
Early representations of Jaw harps have appeared in Western churches since the fourteenth century.
The Austrian composer Johann Albrechtsberger—chiefly known today as a teacher of Beethoven—wrote seven concerti for Jaw harp, mandora, and orchestra between 1769 and 1771. Four of them have survived, in the keys of F major, E-flat major, E major, and D major. They are based on the special use of the Jaw harp in Austrian folk music.
Well known performer Franz Koch (1761–1831), discovered by Frederick the Great, could play two Jaw harps at once, while the also well known performer Karl Eulenstein (1802—1890), "invented a system of playing four at once, connecting them by silken strings in such a way that he could clasp all four with the lips, and strike all the four springs at the same time".
The American composer Charles Ives wrote a part for Jaw harp in the Washington's Birthday movement of A Symphony: New England Holidays.
Western music
The Jaw harp has been used occasionally in rock and country music. For example: