JEL classification codes
Articles in economics journals are usually classified according to JEL classification codes, which derive from the Journal of Economic Literature.  The JEL is published quarterly by the American Economic Association (AEA) and contains survey articles and information on recently published books and dissertations. The AEA maintains EconLit, a searchable data base of citations for articles, books, reviews, dissertations, and working papers classified by JEL codes for the years from 1969. A recent addition to EconLit is indexing of economics journal articles from 1886 to 1968 parallel to the print series Index of Economic Articles.
Structure
There are 26 primary JEL categories:
Each JEL primary category has secondary and tertiary subcategories, for example, under JEL: D – Microeconomics:
JEL code (sub)categories, including periodic updates, are referenced at Journal of Economic Literature (JEL) Classification System.  Links to definitions of (sub)categories are at JEL Classification Codes Guide with corresponding examples of article titles linked to publication information, such as abstracts.
Purpose
Articles in economics journals also list JEL codes (for example JEL: B12), facilitating their use across search engines. Comprehensive uses of JEL (sub)classifications include:
JEL categories
A. General Economics and Teaching
A1     General Economics
A2     Economic Education and Teaching of Economics
A3     Collective Works
B. History of Economic Thought, Methodology, and Heterodox Approaches
B1     History of Economic Thought through 1925
B2     History of Economic Thought since 1925
B3     History of Economic Thought: Individuals
B4     Economic Methodology
B5     Current Heterodox Approaches
C. Mathematical and Quantitative Methods
C1     Econometric and Statistical Methods and Methodology: General
C2     Single Equation Models • Single Variables
C3     Multiple or Simultaneous Equation Models • Multiple Variables
C4     Econometric and Statistical Methods: Special Topics
C5     Econometric Modeling
C6     Mathematical Methods • Programming Models • Mathematical and Simulation Modeling
C7     Game Theory and Bargaining Theory
C8     Data Collection and Data Estimation Methodology • Computer Programs
C9     Design of Experiments
D. Microeconomics
D1     Household Behavior and Family Economics
D2     Production and Organizations
D3     Distribution
D4     Market Structure, Pricing, and Design
D5     General Equilibrium and Disequilibrium
D6     Welfare Economics
D7     Analysis of Collective Decision-Making
D8     Information, Knowledge, and Uncertainty
D9     Micro-Based Behavioral Economics
E. Macroeconomics and Monetary Economics
E1     General Aggregative Models
E2     Consumption, Saving, Production, Investment, Labor Markets, and Informal Economy
E3     Prices, Business Fluctuations, and Cycles
E4     Money and Interest Rates
E5     Monetary Policy, Central Banking, and the Supply of Money and Credit
E6     Macroeconomic Policy, Macroeconomic Aspects of Public Finance, and General Outlook
F. International Economics
F1     Trade
F2     International Factor Movements and International Business
F3     International Finance
F4     Macroeconomic Aspects of International Trade and Finance
F5     International Relations, National Security, and International Political Economy
F6     Economic Impacts of Globalization
G. Financial Economics
G1     General Financial Markets
G2     Financial Institutions and Services
G3     Corporate Finance and Governance
H. Public Economics
H1     Structure and Scope of Government
H2     Taxation, Subsidies, and Revenue
H3     Fiscal Policies and Behavior of Economic Agents
H4     Publicly Provided Goods
H5     National Government Expenditures and Related Policies
H6     National Budget, Deficit, and Debt
H7     State and Local Government • Intergovernmental Relations
H8     Miscellaneous Issues
I. Health, Education, and Welfare
I1     Health
I2     Education and Research Institutions
I3     Welfare, Well-Being, and Poverty
J.  Labor and  Demographic Economics
J1     Demographic Economics
J2     Demand and Supply of Labor
J3     Wages, Compensation, and Labor Costs
J4     Particular Labor Markets
J5     Labor–Management Relations, Trade Unions, and Collective Bargaining
J6     Mobility, Unemployment, Vacancies, and Immigrant Workers
J7     Labor Discrimination
J8     Labor Standards: National and International
K. Law and Economics
K1     Basic Areas of Law
K2     Regulation and Business Law
K3     Other Substantive Areas of Law
K4     Legal Procedure, the Legal System, and Illegal Behavior
L. Industrial Organization
L1     Market Structure, Firm Strategy, and Market Performance
L2     Firm Objectives, Organization, and Behavior
L3     Nonprofit Organizations and Public Enterprise
L4     Antitrust Issues and Policies
L5     Regulation and Industrial Policy
L6     Industry Studies: Manufacturing
L7     Industry Studies: Primary Products and Construction
L8     Industry Studies: Services
L9     Industry Studies: Transportation and Utilities
M. Business Administration and Business Economics • Marketing • Accounting • Personnel Economics
M1     Business Administration
M2     Business Economics
M3     Marketing and Advertising
M4     Accounting and Auditing
M5     Personnel Economics
N. Economic History
N1     Macroeconomics and Monetary Economics • Industrial Structure • Growth • Fluctuations
N2     Financial Markets and Institutions
N3     Labor and Consumers, Demography, Education, Health, Welfare, Income, Wealth, Religion, and Philanthropy
N4     Government, War, Law, International Relations, and Regulation
N5     Agriculture, Natural Resources, Environment, and Extractive Industries
N6     Manufacturing and Construction
N7     Transport, Trade, Energy, Technology, and Other Services
N8     Micro-Business History
N9     Regional and Urban History
O. Economic Development, Innovation, Technological Change, and Growth
O1     Economic Development
O2     Development Planning and Policy
O3     Innovation • Research and Development • Technological Change • Intellectual Property Rights
O4     Economic Growth and Aggregate Productivity
O5     Economywide Country Studies
P. Economic Systems
P1     Capitalist Systems
P2     Socialist Systems and Transitional Economies
P3     Socialist Institutions and Their Transitions
P4     Other Economic Systems
P5      Comparative Economic Systems
Q. Agricultural and Natural Resource Economics • Environmental and Ecological Economics
Q1     Agriculture
Q2     Renewable Resources and Conservation
Q3     Nonrenewable Resources and Conservation
Q4     Energy
Q5     Environmental Economics
R. Urban, Rural, Regional, Real Estate, and Transportation Economics
R1     General Regional Economics
R2     Household Analysis
R3     Real Estate Markets, Spatial Production Analysis, and Firm Location
R4     Transportation Economics
R5     Regional Government Analysis
Y. Miscellaneous Categories
Y1     Data: Tables and Charts
Y2     Introductory Material
Y3     Book Reviews (unclassified)
Y4     Dissertations (unclassified)
Y5     Further Reading (unclassified)
Y6     Excerpts
Y7     No Author General Discussions
Y8     Related Disciplines
Y9     Other
Z. Other Special Topics
Z1     Cultural Economics • Economic Sociology • Economic Anthropology
Z2     Sports Economics
Z3     Tourism Economics
Notes