Jimin
Park Ji-min (Korean: 박지민; born October 13, 1995), known mononymously as Jimin, is a South Korean singer and dancer. In 2013, he made his debut as a member of the South Korean boy band BTS, under the record label Big Hit Entertainment.


Jimin has released three solo tracks with BTS: "Lie" in 2016, "Serendipity" in 2017, and "Filter" in 2020, all of which have charted on South Korea's Gaon Digital Chart. In 2018, he released his first independent song, the digital track "Promise", which he co-wrote and co-composed. He appeared on the soundtrack for the 2022 TvN drama Our Blues, singing the song "With You" with Ha Sung-woon.
Early life and education
Park Ji-min was born on October 13, 1995, in Geumjeong District, Busan, South Korea. His immediate family includes his mother, father, and younger brother. When he was a child, he attended Busan's Hodong Elementary School and Yonsan Middle School. During middle school, he attended Just Dance Academy and learned popping and locking dance. Prior to becoming a trainee, Jimin studied contemporary dance at Busan High School of Arts and was a top student in the modern dance department. After a teacher suggested he audition with an entertainment company, it led him to Big Hit Entertainment. Once he passed the auditions in 2012, he transferred to Korean Arts High School, graduating in 2014.
Jimin graduated from Global Cyber University in August 2020, with a major in Broadcasting and Entertainment. As of 2021, he is enrolled at Hanyang Cyber University, pursuing a Master of Business Administration in Advertising and Media.
Career
2013–present: BTS
Jimin debuted as a vocalist and dancer in the group BTS on June 13, 2013. Under the group's name, he released three solo songs: "Lie", "Serendipity", and "Filter". "Lie" was released in 2016, as part of the group's second Korean studio album, Wings. It was described as stunning and dramatic, conveying dark undertones and emotions in line with the overall concept of the album. In contrast, "Serendipity", released on the group's Love Yourself: Her (2017) extended play (EP), was soft and sensual, unraveling the joy, conviction, and curiosity of love. "Filter", from the group's 2020 studio album Map of the Soul: 7, was very different from its predecessors, with a Latin pop flair and lyrics that reflected on the different sides of himself that Jimin shows to the world and those around him.
"Serendipity" and "Lie" both surpassed fifty million streams on Spotify in 2018, followed shortly thereafter by the former's full length version from BTS' Love Yourself: Answer (2018) compilation album, which achieved the milestone in early 2019. Jimin became the first Korean artist to have three solo tracks accumulate over 50 million streams each, surpassing Psy, who was previously crossed the 50 million streams mark twice with "Gangnam Style" (2012) and "Gentleman" (2013). Both songs were also the only solos by a BTS member included in the Official Chart Company's list of the top 20 most streamed BTS songs in the United Kingdom as of October 2018, ranking at number 17 and 19, respectively. In April 2019, the list was expanded to reflect the top 40, and both tracks were the highest ranked solo songs included that year, at numbers 18 and 20, respectively.
In May 2019, Jimin became the first BTS member to have a solo music video achieve 100 million views on YouTube when "Serendipity" achieved the milestone. He remained the only BTS member with multiple solo songs in the January 2020 update of the Official Chart Company's top 40 list. "Lie" and "Serendipity" were the second and third most-streamed solos, at numbers 24 and 29 respectively, with the full length version of the latter at number 38. In February, "Filter" set a record for the biggest streaming debut among all Korean songs on Spotify, with over 2.2 million streams in its first 24 hours of release, and went on to become the fastest Korean solo in the platform's history to surpass 20–60 million streams. It was also the only solo B-side track by BTS to receive a Song of the Year nomination at the Gaon Chart Music Awards. In March 2021, "Filter" became the 15th BTS song to spend one full year on Billboard's World Digital Song Sales chart. It was the longest-charting Korean song released in 2020 on the ranking, having spent 80 weeks on the chart as of the issue dated October 9, 2021.
Jimin was awarded the fifth-class Hwagwan Order of Cultural Merit in 2018 by the President of South Korea, Moon Jae-in, alongside the other members of BTS for their contributions to the promotion of Korean culture. In July 2021, President Moon appointed him Special Presidential Envoy for Future Generations and Culture, along with the other members of BTS, to help "lead the global agenda for future generations" and "expand South Korea's diplomatic efforts and global standing" in the international community.
2014–present: Solo work
In 2014, Jimin collaborated with bandmate Jungkook on a song called "Christmas Day", a Korean rendition of Justin Bieber's "Mistletoe"; Jimin wrote the Korean lyrics himself. The two collaborated again in 2017 on a cover of American singer Charlie Puth's "We Don't Talk Anymore" (2016) featuring Selena Gomez. Jungkook had previously released a solo version of the song earlier that year in February, and the two prepared the duet as a special gift to the band's fandom, releasing it on June 2, during BTS' fourth anniversary celebrations. Teen Vogue wrote that "adding Jimin's voice to the mix makes the rendition all the more lovely". Canadian outlet Flare magazine also praised the duet rendition, stating that "it honestly might be better than the original". Elite Daily described the cover as "nothing short of flawless".
Jimin appeared on several variety shows such as Hello Counselor, Please Take Care of My Refrigerator, and God's Workplace in 2016. He also served as a special MC on domestic television music programs such as Show! Music Core and M Countdown. In December 2016, he participated in a dance duet at the KBS Song Festival with Taemin from Shinee.
On December 30, 2018, Jimin released his first solo song outside of BTS, "Promise", for free on BTS' SoundCloud page. On January 3, 2019, the platform announced that "Promise" had surpassed the record set by Drake's "Duppy Freestyle" for the biggest 24-hour debut in history. Described by Billboard as a "mellow pop ballad", the song was composed by Jimin and Big Hit producer Slow Rabbit, who also produced the track, and features lyrics written by Jimin and bandmate RM. Jimin released his second solo song "Christmas Love", about his childhood memories of the holidays, on December 24, 2020. In 2022, he participated in the first television soundtrack of his career, for the TvN drama Our Blues. Titled "With You", the single is a duet with Ha Sung-woon and was released on April 24.
Jimin will appear as a featured artist on the single "Vibe" by Taeyang, slated for release on January 13. The song will mark his first official solo project since BTS announced a shift in focus to individual music endeavors in June 2022.
Artistry
Jimin's vocals have been described as delicate and sweet. He is regarded as an exceptional dancer among the members of the group and in K-pop in general. Noelle Devoe of Elite Daily wrote that he is often praised for his "smooth and elegant movements" as well as his charm on stage. In the BTS documentary Burn the Stage, Jimin said he thinks of himself as a perfectionist and that even the smallest mistakes on stage make him feel guilty and stressed.
He has cited singer Rain as one of his inspirations and reasons why he wanted to become both a singer and performer.
Impact and influence
In 2016, Jimin was ranked as the 14th most popular idol in an annual survey conducted by Gallup Korea. He subsequently ranked seventh in 2017, and then consecutively ranked first in 2018 and 2019, as the only idol to top the survey for two consecutive years. In 2018, Jimin was the ninth most-tweeted about celebrity and the eighth most-tweeted about musician globally. He was picked as the 17th best boyband member in history by The Guardian. From January to May 2018, Jimin won the monthly Peeper x Billboard Award for "Top K-Pop Artist–Individual". Peeper x Billboard is a collaboration between the Peeper social media app and Billboard Korea that collects fan votes for their favorite K-pop artists and announces monthly winners. The prize was a donation to UNICEF in his name.
The Cultural Conservation Society awarded Jimin a plaque of appreciation in 2019, for performing buchaechum, a traditional Korean fan dance, during the 2018 Melon Music Awards and helping spread the dance outside of Korea. In October 2021, he became the first idol to spend 34 consecutive months atop the brand reputation ranking for individual boy group idols, and is the only idol to top the overall ranking for three consecutive years.
Jimin is often cited as an influence or role model by various idols in the K-pop industry, many of whom try to emulate his style of dance, mannerisms, and stage presence. This has earned him the titles "Idol of Idols", "Idol's Bible", and "Rookies' Bible", from news and entertainment media. Some idols who have named him include Arthur of Kingdom, Bic of MCND, Kim Si-hun of BDC, Woochul of Newkidd, Hyunjin of Stray Kids, Wooyoung of Ateez, Lim Se-jun of Victon, Huening Kai and Beomgyu of Tomorrow X Together, and Ni-ki and Jay of Enhypen. British internet personality Oli London underwent 18 cosmetic surgeries costing up to £150,000 to resemble Jimin.
Philanthropy
From 2016 to 2018, Jimin supported graduates of his alma mater, Busan Hodong Elementary School, by covering uniform expenses. After news of the school's closing was released, he donated summer and winter middle school uniforms to the final graduates and gifted autographed albums to the entire student body. In early 2019, Jimin donated KRW₩100 million (US$88,000) to the Busan Department of Education to help support lower income students. Of the total, ₩30 million ($23,000) went to his alma mater, Busan Arts High School. In July 2020, he donated another ₩100 million, this time to the Jeonnam Future Education Foundation, for the creation of a scholarship fund for talented but financially struggling students from South Jeolla Province.
In July 2021, Jimin donated ₩100 million to Rotary International, to help polio patients. As with previous donations, the benefaction was made privately, but the news became public in September, when the Go-seong Rotary Club displayed a banner thanking him for the donation. On October 12, 2021, he was announced as a member of the Green Noble Club, a group of major donors to the Green Umbrella Children's Foundation who have made donations of ₩100 million or more.
In September 2022, Jimin made a personal donation to the Gangwon-do Education Office.
Personal life
Since 2018, Jimin has lived in Hannam-dong, Seoul, South Korea, with his bandmates. In 2021, he purchased a property in the area, worth US$5.3 million.
Health
In 2017, during BTS' Wings Tour, Jimin was unable to participate in the group's single concert in Macau, China, due to cramping in his neck and shoulders. The following year, while in London for the Love Yourself World Tour, he withdrew from the recording of a scheduled appearance on The Graham Norton Show per a Big Hit-released statement that the singer was "suffering from severe muscle pain in his neck and back".
Discography
Writing credits
All song credits are adapted from the Korea Music Copyright Association's database, unless otherwise noted.
Notes