Kabsa
Kabsa (Arabic: كبسة kabsah) is an Arab mixed rice dish, served on a communal platter, that originates from Saudi Arabia It is commonly regarded as a national dish in all the countries of the Arabian Peninsula (Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Bahrain, Qatar, the United Arab Emirates, Oman, and Yemen). It can also be found in regions such as southern Iran, the Negev desert in Israel, and the Malabar Coast of India. 
The dish is also popularly known as makbūs/machbūs (مكبوس/مچبوس Gulf pron.: [mɑtʃˈbuːs]). The dish is made with rice and meat.
Etymology
The name comes from the word kabasa (Arabic: كبس), literally meaning to press or squeeze, alluding to the technique used in the cooking where the ingredients are all cooked in (or "squeezed into") one pot.
Ingredients
These dishes are usually made with rice (usually basmati), meat, vegetables, and a mixture of spices. There are many kinds of kabsa and each kind has a uniqueness about it.
Pre-mixed kabsa spices are now available under several brand names. These reduce preparation time, but may have a flavor distinct from traditional kabsa. The spices used in kabsa are largely responsible for its taste; these are generally black pepper, cloves, cardamom, saffron, cinnamon, black lime, bay leaves and nutmeg.
The main ingredient that accompanies the spices is the meat. The meats used are usually chicken, goat, lamb, camel, beef, fish or shrimp. In chicken machbūs, a whole chicken is used.
The spices, rice, and meat may be augmented with almonds, pine nuts, peanuts, onions, and sultanas.  The dish can be garnished with ḥashū (Arabic: حشو) and served hot with daqqūs (Arabic: دقّوس), which is a home-made Arabic tomato sauce.
Methods of cooking
Meat for kabsa can be cooked in various ways. A popular way of preparing meat is called mandi. This is an ancient technique that originates in Yemen, whereby meat is barbecued in a deep hole in the ground that is covered while the meat cooks. Another way of preparing and serving meat for kabsa is mathbi, where seasoned meat is grilled on flat stones that are placed on top of burning embers. A third technique, madghūt, involves cooking the meat in a pressure cooker.