Kermanshah province
Kermanshah Province (Persian: استان كرمانشاه, romanized: Ostān-e Kermanšah, Kurdish: پارێزگای کرماشان, romanized: Parêzgeha Kirmaşan) is one of the 31 provinces of Iran. The province was known from 1969 to 1986 as Kermanshahan and from 1986 to 1995 as Bakhtaran. According to a 2014 segmentation by the Ministry of Interior it is center of Region 4, with the region's central secretariat located at the province's capital city, Kermanshah. A majority of people in Kermanshah Province are Shia, and there are Sunni and Yarsani minority groups.
Geography
Kermanshah province is located in western Iran. It shares borders with Kurdistan province, Hamadan province, Lorestan province and Ilam province in Iran. It also shares borders with the Iraqi governorates of Halabja, Sulaymaniyah and Diyala.
Major cities and towns in Kermanshah Province include Kermanshah, Eslamabad-e Gharb, Paveh, Harsin, Kangavar, Sonqor, Javanrud, Ravansar, Gilan-e Gharb, Sahneh, Qasr-e Shirin, and Sarpol-e Zahab.
Counties
Kermanshah consists of 14 shahrestans (counties):
Capital
The province's capital is Kermanshah (34°18′N 47°4′E), located in the middle of the western part of Iran. The population of the city is 822,921.
The city is built on the slopes of Mt. Sefid Kooh and extended toward south during last two decades. The builtup areas run alongside Sarab River and Sarab Valley. City's elevation average about 1,350 meters above sea level.
The distance between Kermanshah and Tehran is 525 km. It is the trade center of rich agricultural region that produces grain, rice, vegetable, fruits, and oilseeds, and there are many industrial centers, oil and sugar refineries, and cement, textile and flour factories, etc. The airport (Shahid Ashrafi Esfahani Airport) is located in north east of the city, and the distance from Tehran is 413 km by air.
History
The province has a rich Paleolithic heritage. Many caves with Paleolithic remains have been surveyed or excavated there. some of these cave sites are located in Bisetun and north of Kermanshah. The first known physical remains of Neanderthal man in Iran was discovered in Bisitun Cave. Do-Ashkaft Cave, Kobeh, Warwasi, and Mar Tarik are some of the Middle Paleolithic sites in the region. Kermanshah also has many Neolithic sites, of which the most famous are Ganj Dareh, Sarab, and Asiab. At Ganj Dareh, the earliest evidence for goat domestication have been documented. In May 2009, based on a research conducted by the University of Hamedan and UCL, the head of Archeology Research Center of Iran's Cultural Heritage and Tourism Organization announced that the oldest prehistoric village in the Middle East dating back to 9800 B.C., was discovered in Sahneh, located in west of Kermanshah.
The monuments found in Kermanshah show two glorious periods, the Achaemenid and Sassanid eras. The mythical ruler of the Pishdadian is described as founding the city while Tahmores Divband built it. An alternative narrative is that the construction was by Bahram IV of the Sassanid dynasty during the 4th century CE. Kermanshah reached a peak during the reign of Hormizd IV and Khosrau I of Sassanids, before being demoted to a secondary royal residence.
The city suffered major damage during the Arab invasions but recovered in the Safavid period to make great progress. Concurrent with the Afghan attack and the fall of Isfahan, Kermanshah was almost completely destroyed by the Ottoman invasion.
During the Iran–Iraq War the province suffered heavy fighting. Most towns and cities were badly damaged and some like Sar-e Pol-e Zahab and Qhasr-e-Shirin were almost completely destroyed.
The November 2017 Iran–Iraq earthquake killed more than 600 people.
On December 28, 2017, Kermanshah became one of several Iranian provinces to break out into protests.  The Supreme Leader of Iran has blamed western interference.  Some female organizations such as The National Council of Resistance of Iran (NCRI) have taken partial credit for the organization of these protests.
Climate
As it is situated between two cold and warm regions enjoys a moderate climate. Kermanshah has a moderate and mountainous climate. It rains most in winter and is moderately warm in summer. The annual rainfall is 500 mm. The average temperature in the hottest months is above 22 °C.
Economy
International and border trade
Kermanshah province has 371 km of common border with Iraq.There are five official border markets in the province. Three of these neighbor the Kurdish part of Iraq and the other two the Iraqi central government (Khosravi, Sumar). Based on figures from 9 November 2021, with a share of 5.7 to 6 percent Kermanshah province is among the first five exporters of non-oil products of Iran. Around 30 to 35 percent of theses exports were from the province's own products. The highest share of exports belong to Parviz Khan which borders Iraqi Kurdistan followed by Khosravi and Sumar.
Exports from Kermanshah Province hit $2.7 billion in the fiscal year 2021-22 (ending March 20), registering a 15% growth compared with the previous year, according to a local official.
The province's share in Iran's total exports during the period stood at 10% in terms of tonnage and 12% in value.
Kermanshah's share in total exports to Iraq stood at 53% and share in non-oil goods reached 43%.
Non-oil exports from Kermanshah mainly include tomato and tomato paste, air conditioners, cheese, industrial oil and their derivatives, biscuit, different types of melon, watermelon, tile and ceramic, plastic bags, marble, yogurt, milk, cream, cucumber, eggplant, apple and melamine dishes.
Local products
Kermanshah lends its name to a type of Persian carpet named after the region. It also has famous sweets made of rice, locally known as Nan-e berenji. The other famous Kermanshahi good is a special kind of oil, locally known as Rüne Dân and globally in Iran known as Roghan Kermanshahi. The Giveh of Kermanshah known as Klash is the highest quality Giveh.
Historical attractions
Various attractions exist that date from the pre-Islamic era, such as the Kohneh Bridge, to contemporary parks and museums. Some of the more popular sites are:
Higher education
Higher education and research
Notable people
One of the renowned scientists and writers of this region is Al-Dinawari who was born at Dinawar north-east of Kermanshah. He lived in the 9th century and has written many books in astronomy, botany and history.
Notable people born in Kermansha include British author, Nobel prize winner, Doris Lessing, whose father, a British army officer, was stationed there at the time of her birth.
Mirza Ahmad Khan Motazed-Dowleh Vaziri created the first printing office and founded the first private school of Kermanshahan. Guity Novin a painter and a graphic designer who has founded the Transpressionism movement was born in Kermanshah. The famous Sufi Scholar, Abdul Qader Gailani, was born in the region.