Leonardo da Vinci–Fiumicino Airport
Rome–Fiumicino International Airport "Leonardo da Vinci" (Italian: Aeroporto Internazionale di Roma–Fiumicino "Leonardo da Vinci"; IATA: FCO, ICAO: LIRF) is an international airport in Fiumicino, Italy, serving Rome. It is the busiest airport in the country, the eleventh-busiest airport in Europe and the world's 49th-busiest airport with over 43.5 million passengers served. It covers an area of 16 square kilometres (6.2 sq mi).
The airport served as the main hub for Alitalia, formerly the flag carrier and largest Italian airline, which terminated operations on 15 October 2021. It is now the main international hub for Alitalia's successor, ITA Airways.
As of 2022, it has won the “Best Airport Award” in the category of hubs with over 40 million passengers, issued by Airports Council International (ACI) Europe, for three years in a row.
History
Early years
During construction the remains of Caligula's Giant Ship were found.
The airport was officially opened on 15 January 1961, with two runways, replacing the smaller Rome Ciampino Airport, which remains in service for some low-cost airlines as well as domestic and charter operations.  Despite being officially opened in 1961, Leonardo da Vinci–Fiumicino Airport had actually been in use since 20 August 1960.  This was to help relieve air traffic that was congesting Rome Ciampino Airport during the 1960 Summer Olympics.
During the 1960s, former home-based Alitalia invested heavily in the new airport, building hangars and maintenance centres; in the same period a third runway was added (16L/34R).
Later development
Security Services transferred from the Polizia di Stato (Italian State Police) to Aeroporti di Roma S.p.A. in 2000. Aeroporti di Roma created ADR Security S.r.l. (100%-owned) to provide these services as well as security services to airlines (in competition with other security companies such as IVRI).  Airport Security is supervised by Polizia di Stato, Guardia di Finanza (Italian Customs Police), Italian Civil Aviation Authority and Aeroporti di Roma S.p.A.. Ground handling services were provided by Aeroporti di Roma until 1999, when it created Aeroporti di Roma Handling (to serve all airlines except for Alitalia, which continued to be handled by Aeroporti di Roma itself). Alitalia provided passenger assistance even before 1999. In 2001, Alitalia created "Alitalia Airport" and started providing ground handling for itself and other airlines. Aeroporti di Roma Handling remains the biggest handler in terms of airlines handled, but Alitalia Airport is the biggest handler in terms of airplanes handled as Alitalia aircraft account for 50% of the ones at Fiumicino. In May 2006, Italy's Civil Aviation Authority announced that it took off the limitation of 3 ramp handlers in Rome Leonardo da Vinci airport. ARE Group and Aviapartner announced that they would create a company called Aviapartner (51% Aviapartner; 49% ARE Group) to serve Milan Malpensa and Rome Leonardo da Vinci.
Since 2005, the airport operates a category III B instrument landing system (ILS). Further improvement work was implemented in 2007 to enable the airport to handle 30 takeoffs/landings per hour, up from 10, in the event of thick fog. Three runways presently operate at Leonardo da Vinci airport: 16L/34R and 16R/34L (separated by a distance of 4,000 m (13,000 ft), and 07/25, used only westwards for takeoffs owing to the prevailing winds. The airport used to have a fourth runway, 16C/34C which was located alongside 16L/34R, it was mostly used as a taxiway or as a backup for 16L/34R; the runway is now designated as Taxiway "D".
In 2010, the new single baggage handling system for more efficient luggage delivery began operations.
Several projects are planned. These include the construction of an environmentally-friendly cogeneration system, which would allow the airport to produce its own energy; the "Masterplan Fiumicino Nord", involving four new terminals and two new runways to be built in the future handling 100 million passengers per year.
Terminals
Overview
As of 2021, after major expansion and refurbishment works, the airport now features two reorganised passenger terminals, one of which is currently operational.
Development
The terminals were upgraded during the 1990s and 2000s. In 1991, the domestic Pier A with 12 gates opened, followed in 1995 by the international Pier B with 10 gates and in 1999 by the international Satellite C with 14 gates. In 2000, the new domestic Terminal A opened, and the terminal buildings, then consisting of Terminal A (with Pier A), Terminal AA, Terminal B (with Pier B) and Terminal C (with Satellite C), were reorganized.
The dedicated Cargo City terminal was added in 2004, while the check-in counters for Northwest Airlines, Delta Air Lines, Continental Airlines, United Airlines, US Airways, American Airlines and El Al in Terminal 5 opened in 2008, with passengers then being bused to what was then called Satellite C. In 2009, the terminals were renamed – A was renamed T1, AA was renamed T2, B and C became T3, and T5 stayed the same.
In January 2017, Terminal 5 was closed for renovations; a new central airside hall is currently being built in the middle section.
The former Terminal 2 closed permanently on 15 December 2017 to make way for the north-west expansion of Terminal 1.  A new three-storey boarding and waiting area, as well as a new Pier A with 13 boarding and 10 remote gates, are currently being constructed alongside Terminal 1, to open in Summer 2022.
From 17 March 2020 to 6 August 2021, Terminal 1 has been closed due to decreased passenger traffic amidst the Covid-19 pandemic; this pause was used to perform a redesign of the main hall layout, which increased the available passenger space.
Future plans include a new Terminal 4, expansion of runways, and new buildings for car parking, services, and airport facilities.
SkyBridge
An automated people mover (APM) called SkyBridge opened in 1999 along with the Satellite C. It consists of two stations, one in the third floor of Terminal 3, and the other in the second floor of gate area E31–44. This shuttle train is the only means of transport for passengers between the two parts of the terminal. The westbound service, from T3 to Gates E31–44, is for departing passengers only, while the eastbound service is for arriving passengers only. Arriving passengers are not permitted to take the train back, as they need to pass through a transfer security checkpoint to reenter the departure area. Likewise, departing passengers are not permitted to take the train back to Terminal 3.
Airlines and destinations
The following airlines operate regular scheduled, seasonal and charter flights to and from Fiumicino:
Ground transportation
Train
Fiumicino Aeroporto railway station is served by the Leonardo Express train operated by Trenitalia, available at the airport terminal. It takes 30 minutes to get to Termini Station in a non-stop trip that is provided every 15 minutes. Alternatively, local trains (FL1 line) leave once every 15 minutes, stopping at all stations. However, these trains do not head to Termini station. Passengers have to change at Trastevere, Ostiense (Metro Piramide) or Tuscolana. The railway opened in December 1989, with non-stop and several stopping services available.
Road
Leonardo da Vinci is about 35 km (22 mi) by car from Rome's historic city centre. The airport is served by the six-lane Autostrada A91 motorway and numerous buses and taxis.
Incidents and accidents
From the 1960s until the 1980s, the airport experienced significant aircraft hijackings as well as being the scene of two major terrorist attacks and the port of origin for an aircraft bombing in flight—some engendered by Palestinians as part of the Israeli–Palestinian conflict.