Lost in Space (2018 TV series)
Lost in Space is an American science fiction streaming television series following the adventures of a family of space colonists whose ship veers off course.  The series is a reboot of the 1965 series of the same name, inspired by the 1812 novel The Swiss Family Robinson.
Produced by Legendary Television, Synthesis Entertainment, Clickety-Clack Productions, and Applebox Entertainment, the show is written by Matt Sazama and Burk Sharpless, with Zack Estrin serving as showrunner. Netflix released the series on April 13, 2018, renewing it the following month for a second season. The second season premiered on December 24, 2019. The third and final season was released on December 1, 2021.
Premise
In 2046, two years after an impact event that threatens the survival of humanity, the Robinson family is selected for the 24th mission of the Resolute (24th Colonist Group), an interstellar spacecraft carrying selected families and civilians to colonize the Alpha Centauri planetary system.
Before they reach their destination, an alien robot breaches the Resolute's hull. Forced to evacuate the mothership in numerous short-range Jupiter spacecraft, scores of colonists, among them the Robinsons, crash on a nearby habitable planet. There they must contend with a strange environment and battle their own personal demons as they search for a way back to the Resolute.
A large part of the show revolves around Will Robinson's connection to an alien robot and an alien engine capable of interstellar travel that a small group of humans had previously and secretly stolen from the robots. An army of other robots, much like Will's robot, try to take the engine back, stranding everyone in deep space. The army is led by a robot dubbed "SAR" (Second Alien Robot). The robots' creators are largely unknown, except for the fact that they are extinct.
Cast
Main
Introduced in season 1
Introduced in season 2
Introduced in season 3
Guest
Production
Development
In October 2014, it was announced that Legendary Television and Synthesis Entertainment were developing a new reboot of Lost in Space and had hired screenwriting duo Matt Sazama and Burk Sharpless to pen the pilot episodes. In November 2015, Netflix landed the project. On June 29, 2016, Netflix ordered a full 10-episode season of Lost in Space, with Zack Estrin as executive producer and showrunner. Sazama, Sharpless, Kevin Burns, Jon Jashni, Neil Marshall, and Marc Helwig also serve as executive producers.
Filming
Production on the first season began in February 2017 in Vancouver, British Columbia, and concluded in July 2017. The second season began production in Iceland in September 2018, and concluded in January 2019. Filming for the third and final season began in British Columbia on September 9, 2020, and concluded on January 14, 2021.
Release
On March 31, 2018, the series pilot was screened at Awesome Con in Washington, D.C. The first season, consisting of 10 episodes, was released on April 13, 2018, on Netflix. On June 4, 2019, 20th Century Fox Home Entertainment released DVDs and Blu-rays of the first season titled "Lost In Space: The Complete First Season". The second season, also consisting of 10 episodes, was released on December 24, 2019, on Netflix. The third and final season, consisting of eight episodes, was released on December 1, 2021.
Reception
Critical response
The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported a 68% approval rating based on 75 reviews, for the first season, with an average rating of 6.43/10. The website's critics consensus reads: "Lost in Space's production values are ambitious enough to attract sci-fi adventure fans, while the story's large heart adds an emotional anchor to all the deep space derring-do." Metacritic, which uses a weighted average, assigned a normalized score of 58 out of 100 based on 27 critics for the first season, indicating "mixed or average reviews".
David Griffin of IGN gave the first season a rating of 8.5/10, calling it "an excellent sci-fi adventure with a slight villain problem", giving particular praise to the Robinson family, while criticizing Parker Posey's Dr. Smith as an unsophisticated and one-dimensional character who lacks redeeming qualities. In contrast, Jen Chaney of Vulture characterized Posey's performance as providing "understated, sly comedic touches", and Beth Elderkin of Gizmodo agreed: "Her performance definitely includes the character’s trademark levity and humor."
On Rotten Tomatoes the second season has an approval rating of 85% based on 13 reviews, with an average rating of 6.6/10. The website's critics consensus states: "Gorgeous effects and a simple, solid, story help Lost in Space's second season find itself on stronger ground."
Dylan Roth of Polygon gave the third season a mostly positive review, calling it an "exciting, delightful, and self-contained space adventure that stands in contrast against the ever more complex universes of its contemporaries." Roth criticized the character of Dr. Smith however, and the overall writing of the show's antagonists. Renaldo Matadeen of CBR criticized the show's handling of Dr. Smith's narrative arc.