Malay styles and titles


The Malay language has a complex system of styles, titles and honorifics which are used extensively in Brunei, Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore, and the southern Philippines.
Brunei, Malaysia, Singapore and several provinces in Indonesia regularly award honorary and life titles. What follows in this article is specific to the Malaysian system. References to Brunei and Indonesia are given when pertinent.
In Malaysia, all non-hereditary titles can be granted to both men and women. Every title has a form which can be used by the wife of the title holder. This form is not used by the husband of a titled woman; such a woman will bear a title which is the same as a titled man.
Former use
Singapore, whose Malay royalty was abolished by the British colonial government in 1891, has adopted civic titles for its leaders.
The Philippines historically used Malay titles during its pre-Hispanic period (especially under Bruneian influence), as evidenced by the titles of historical figures such as Rajah Sulayman, Lakandula and Dayang Kalangitan. Malay titles are still used by the royal houses of Sulu, Maguindanao, Buayan, and Maranao on the southern Philippine island of Mindanao, but these are retained on a traditional basis, as the 1987 Constitution explicitly reaffirms the abolition of royal and noble titles in the republic.
Indonesia, meanwhile, as a republic, does not recognize hereditary rulers and aristocratic systems. However, one traditional Javanese monarchy is still recognized in Indonesia, namely the Sultanate of Yogyakarta. The hereditary Sultans will hold the position as governor of the province which is recognised by the government. Nevertheless, other royal titles and honors are still used as courtesy titles throughout the republic.
Usage
The sequence that should be used when formally writing or addressing a person's name is:  honorary style, professional rank, royal hereditary title, federal title, state title, non-royal hereditary title, Doctor (of medicine or philosophy), Haji/Hajah (for Muslim men and women who have performed the Hajj), name.
For instance in Brunei, the title for one of Bruneian traditional ministers (Pehin-Pehin Cheteria) whose honorary title would be Yang Berhormat, profession rank is Pehin Orang Kaya Seri Lela, state title is Dato Seri Setia and traditional Bruneian Malay prefix title for non-royalty is Awang. An example would be Yang Berhormat Pehin Orang Kaya Seri Lela Dato Seri Setia Awang Haji Abdul Rahman bin Dato Setia Haji Mohamed Taib
When in the home state, the state title may precede the federal title. An example is the current Premier of Sarawak, Abang Abdul Rahman Zohari Abang Openg, whose federal title is Tan Sri and whose state title is Datuk Patinggi. His title will be expressed as either:
Another exception is when a person has received an award from a state other than the person's home state; when visiting the award-bestowing state, that state's title will take the place of a home state's title (if any). As an example, the current Prime Minister, Anwar Ibrahim will be titled as follows:
A style carried by virtue of royal title always trumps those carried by non-royal titles. Male royals may choose to append "al-Haj" to their name instead of using "Haji". The following example is correct:
Malay royalty
The following titles are hereditary and reserved for royal families of the royal families of Brunei and nine royal states of Malaysia. Brunei is the only absolute monarchy left in the Malay's world and the monarchy has the power in the government.
Brunei
The following styles and official titles are used for members of the royal house in Brunei. As Brunei is an absolute monarchy, it is important to address royal family members with the correct title. Improper usage may cause discomfort:
The Sultan and the Queen of Brunei are styled as Kebawah Duli Yang Maha Mulia Paduka Seri Baginda (KDYMM PSB) (literally "his/her most glorious majesty who is raised most high");
For those who have blood-ties with the royal family who are married, styled as Prince or Princess in English, and given the hereditary honorific prefix Pengiran:
Exclusive royal titles for the descendant of Princess Norehsani, the only surviving female heir of the 26th Sultan of Brunei, Ahmad Tajuddin, the uncle of the current Sovereign Sultan Hassanal Bolkiah;
A person who marries a distant member of the royal family (ie: Pengiran) is given the title Pengiran Anak; the title is lost if they divorce.
According to the Royal Custom (Adat Istiadat), the title of Pengiran will be given to at least 5 five generations of Pengiran Anak descendants (grandchildren, great-grandchildren and great-great-grandchildren) and they will no longer use the Pengiran Anak titles.
The unmarried children of Pengiran are style as Awangku for males and Dayangku for females. Not to be confused with Brunei's equivalent of Mr. (Awang) and Ms. (Dayang), which applies to everyone with no royal titles.
Malaysia
Federal
Titles of Malaysian royalty and rulers:
Negeri Sembilan
Selangor
Perlis
Terengganu
Kedah
Kelantan
Pahang
Johor
Perak
Federal titles
In Malaysia, the Yang di-Pertuan Agong (King of Malaysia) grants honours to recipients nominated by the Government of Malaysia as awards which are honorary and non-hereditary. These honours may also be revoked by the Yang di-Pertuan Agong or returned by the individual. Some of the highest honours bestowed carries with them the titles of Tun, Tan Sri or Datuk.
There is a maximum number of Malaysian subjects who may be award-holders at any one time. These numerical limits apply only to Malaysian subjects. Foreigners may be awarded such titles in a supernumerary and honorary capacity and may use the title locally.
Tun
The Tun title has existed in Malaysian society for hundreds of years. In ancient times, Tun was an honorific title used by noble people of royal lineage, inherited by the male descendants. Over time, the Tun title has become a title conferred by the Yang di-Pertuan Agong to the most-deserving recipient who has highly contributed to the nation.
Tun is the most senior federal title awarded to recipients of either the Seri Maharaja Mangku Negara (Grand Commander of the Order of the Defender of the Realm) (SMN) or Seri Setia Mahkota (Grand Commander of the Order of Loyalty to the Crown of Malaysia) (SSM). However, the SMN and SSM are not the highest federal awards, ranking fourth and fifth, respectively. There may not be more than 25 (SMN) and 35 (SSM) living holders of each of these awards respectively at any one time. The title for the wife of a Tun is called Toh Puan. The recipients and their wives are then bestowed with the style of Yang Amat Berbahagia or (The Most Felicitous).
The SMN is usually awarded to newly appointed Yang di-Pertua Negeri (YDPN) and to all the retired Prime Ministers of Malaysia with the exception of Tunku Abdul Rahman (He is the Prince of the state of Kedah), Najib Razak, Muhyiddin Yassin and Ismail Sabri Yaakob. The most senior state titles of "Dato Seri Utama" and "Datuk Seri Utama" are of equivalent rank with Tun.
Examples:
Tan Sri
Tan Sri is the second-most senior federal title and a honorific used to denote recipients of the Panglima Mangku Negara (Commander of the Order of the Defender of the Realm) (PMN) and the Panglima Setia Mahkota (Commander of the Order of Loyalty to the Crown of Malaysia) (PSM). The wife of a Tan Sri is called Puan Sri. The recipients and their wives are then bestowed with the style of Yang Berbahagia or (The Felicitous). State title "Dato Sri" and "Dato Seri" share equivalent rank with Tan Sri.
Examples:
Datuk
Datuk is a federal title that has been conferred since 1965. It is limited to recipients of Panglima Jasa Negara (Commander of the Order of Meritorious Service) (PJN) and Panglima Setia Diraja (Commander of the Order of Loyalty to the Royal Family of Malaysia) (PSD). There may be up to 200 living PJN holders and 200 living PSD holders at any one time. The wife of a Datuk is called a Datin. The recipients and their wives are then bestowed with the style of Yang Berbahagia (The Felicitous).
Examples:
State titles
In Malaysia, state honours are awarded by the respective heads of the thirteen states. Such titles are honorary and non-hereditary. State titles may be revoked or suspended by the head of state or may be returned by the individual. Dato' Sri or Dato' Seri (sometimes Dato’ is spelled and pronounced Datuk in some states) is the highest state title conferred by the Ruler on the most deserving recipients who have contributed greatly to the nation or state. It ranks below the federal title Tun and is an honour equivalent to federal title Tan Sri. The wife of a recipient is Datin Sri or Datin Seri. In many cases, the number of Malaysian nationals who may hold a state title or honour at one time is limited.  Such limits do not apply to foreigners.
Pehin
This title is mainly used in Brunei. An example of the title in Brunei would be Pehin Orang Kaya Laila Setia Bakti Di-Raja Dato Laila Utama Haji Awang Isa, the former Minister of Home Affairs and the current Special Adviser to the Sultan of Brunei. The titles refers to the traditional ministers posts in Brunei.
Pehin Sri
This title is mainly used in Sarawak. Awarded to individuals who have been appointed as Yang di-Pertua Negeri of Sarawak or equivalent or higher. An example of the title in Sarawak would be Tun Pehin Sri Haji Abdul Taib Mahmud, Yang di-Pertua Negeri of Sarawak.
Seri Setia
This title is mainly used in Malacca. Awarded to individuals who have been appointed as Yang di-Pertua Negeri of Malacca or equivalent or higher. An example of the title in Malacca would be Tun Seri Setia (Dr.) Haji Mohd Ali Rustam, Yang di-Pertua Negeri of Malacca.
JP
Justice of Peace (JP) ranks below all Dato' or Datuk. In Malaysia, Justices of Peace have largely been replaced in magistrates' courts by legally-qualified (first-class) stipendiary magistrates. However, state governments continue to appoint Justices of Peace as honours. In 2004, some associations of JPs pressed the federal government to allow JPs to sit as second-class magistrates to reduce the backlog of cases in the courts.
Special cases
If a person has been awarded several honours from different states, the title used varies. For example, sometimes former Prime Minister, Mahathir Mohamad is usually referred to as YABhg Tun Dr. Mahathir Mohamad anywhere in Malaysia. However, different terms of address may be used in the states that he visits.
In Sarawak, he will be referred to as YABhg Tun Pehin Sri Mahathir Mohamad as he received the Knight Grand Commander of the Order of the Star of Sarawak (SBS) from the Yang di-Pertua Negeri of Sarawak.
While in Sabah, he is referred to as Tun Datuk Seri Panglima Dr. Mahathir Mohamad, as he received the Grand Commander of the Order of Kinabalu (SPDK) from the Yang di-Pertua Negeri of Sabah.
Honorary styles
The following are used as styles, both before a person's title and by themselves as forms of address:
The English versions of these styles follow British usage. Thus the prime minister, cabinet ministers, senators, state executive councillors and judges of the High Court and above are styled the Honourable or the Right Honourable, although technically it is a solecism to style the prime minister or heads of courts Right Honourable as they are not members of the Privy Council of the United Kingdom.
Other Malay titles by inheritance
Other titles
Related issues
Not all Datuks have lived exemplary lives and some have been convicted of crimes. The various rulers have recently taken steps to ensure the integrity of the institution by means of consultation and the revoking of the given titles.
Mahathir Mohamad mentioned that one of the problems with titles in Malaysia is the numbers of them given out. He stated in an interview "Personally, I feel if you want to give value to anything, it must be limited...if you produce a million Ferrari cars, nobody will care about buying a Ferrari."
The Sultan Nazrin Shah of Perak, stated "That is my view. You degrade the award and the Ruler has the right to revoke it. In my opinion, it should be taken away." He also stated that  "Sometimes, I think we give away too many datukships...it dilutes and devalues the award."
In the first government following the independence of Malaya in 1957, 5 of 15 cabinet Ministers were Datuks. The Minister of Finance of Malaysia at the time, Tan Siew Sin, held the title Justice of Peace. Later, he was granted a Federal award which carried the title Tun. The father of Malayan independence, Tunku Abdul Rahman Putra Al-Haj, received no awards and carried the title "Tunku", which he inherited as the prince of the state of Kedah. He was honorarily referred to as "Yang Teramat Mulia" (YTM). The Senate held only 14 Datuks and House of Representatives held only 7.
The Malacca government was criticised for awarding the Datuk title to a non-Malaysian Indian actor, Shah Rukh Khan, for making movies and promoting the Malacca state internationally.
Negeri Sembilan
Pahang
Selangor