Member of Parliament, Rajya Sabha
A Member of Parliament in the Rajya Sabha (abbreviated: MP) is the representative of the Indian states to the one of the two houses of the Parliament of India (Rajya Sabha). Rajya Sabha MPs are elected by the electoral college of the elected members of the State Assembly with a system of proportional representation by a single transferable vote. Parliament of India is bicameral with two houses; Rajya Sabha (Upper house i.e. Council of States) and the Lok Sabha (Lower house i.e. House of the People). The total number of members of Rajya Sabha are lesser than the Members of Parliament in the Lok Sabha and have more restricted power than the lower house (Lok Sabha). Unlike membership to the Lok Sabha, membership to the Rajya Sabha is permanent body and cannot be dissolved at any time. However every second year, one third of the members are retired and vacancy are filled up by fresh elections and Presidential nomination at the beginning of every third year.
Responsibilities of the members of parliament
Broad responsibilities of the members of parliament of Rajya Sabha are:
Special powers
Members of Parliament in the Rajya Sabha enjoy special powers and responsibilities with regard to:
Term
Unlike membership to the Lok Sabha, membership to the Rajya Sabha is permanent. One third of its members retire every two years. So each member has a term of six years
Qualifications for being a member of parliament
A person must satisfy all following conditions to be qualified to become a member of parliament of the Rajya Sabha:
Disqualifications for being a member of parliament
A person would be ineligible for being a Member of the Rajya Sabha if the person:
Composition/strength
Membership in the Rajya Sabha is limited to 250 members, and up to 238 members are elected by the members of all the Vidhan Sabhas (individual state legislatures) and up to 12 are nominated by the President for their contributions to art, literature, science, and social services. The strength can be lower than 250: the current one is at 245. (See next section on members.)