Navy blue
Navy blue is a dark shade of the color blue.
Navy blue got its name from the dark blue (contrasted with naval white) worn by officers in the Royal Navy since 1748 and subsequently adopted by other navies around the world. When this color name, taken from the usual color of the uniforms of sailors, originally came into use in the early 19th century, it was initially called marine blue, but the name of the color soon changed to navy blue.
An early use of navy blue as a color name in English was in 1840 though the Oxford English Dictionary has a citation from 1813.
Variations
Indigo dye
Indigo dye is the color that is called Añil (the Spanish word for "indigo dye") in the Guía de coloraciones (Guide to colorations) by Rosa Gallego and Juan Carlos Sanz, a color dictionary published in 2005 that is widely popular in the Hispanophone realm.
Indigo dye is the basis for all the historical navy blue colors, since in the 18th, 19th, and early 20th century, almost all navy uniforms were made by dyeing them with various shades of indigo dye.
Navy blue (Crayola)
The Crayola color named "navy blue" is not as dark a shade as the standard navy blue shown above.
This tone of navy blue was formulated as a Crayola color in 1958. 
Peacoat
The source of this color is the "Pantone Textile Cotton eXtended (TCX)" color list, color #19-3920 TCX—Peacoat.
Purple navy
Purple navy is a color that has been used by some navies. "Purple navy" in this color terminology usage is regarded as a shade of indigo, a color which can be regarded as a tone of purple when using the common English definition of purple, i.e., a color between blue and red.
The first recorded use of purple navy as a color name in English was in 1926.
The source of this color is Dictionary of Color Names (1955).
Persian indigo
Another name for this color (seldom used nowadays) is regimental, because in the 19th century it was commonly used by many nations for navy uniforms.
The first recorded use of regimental (the original name for the color now called Persian indigo) as a color name in English was in 1912.
Space cadet
Space cadet is one of the colors on the Resene Color List, a color list widely popular in Australia and New Zealand. The color was formulated in 2007.
This color is apparently a formulation of an impression of the color that cadets in space navy training would wear.
In culture
Computers
Military
Music
Sports
Navy blue is used by numerous professional and collegiate sports teams: