Nissan GT-R
The Nissan GT-R (Japanese: 日産・GT-R, Nissan GT-R), is a high-performance sports car and grand tourer produced by Nissan, unveiled in 2007. It is the successor to the Skyline GT-R, a high performance variant of the Nissan Skyline. Although this car was the sixth-generation model to bear the GT-R name, the model is no longer part of the Nissan Skyline model line up since that name is now reserved for Nissan's luxury-sport vehicles. The GT-R is built on the exclusively-developed Nissan PM platform, which is an enhanced evolution of the Nissan FM platform used in the separate Nissan Skyline luxury car and the Nissan Z sports car. The GT-R abbreviation stands for Gran Turismo–Racing, obtained from the Skyline GT-R.
In 2006, then-Nissan CEO Carlos Ghosn determined that the GT-R would be a global icon for the Nissan brand, as unlike its predecessors which were only sold in Japan, the GT-R would be sold all around the world.
The production version of the GT-R was introduced at the 2007 Tokyo Motor Show, along with the PM platform, featured the exclusively developed VR38DETT engine and lot more other newer technologies. Overall body was made out of steel, aluminium and premium materials such as carbon-fiber. The GT-R achieved success as a road car as well as in motorsports.
History
Between 1969 and 1974, and again between 1989 and 2002, Nissan produced a high performance version of its Nissan Skyline coupe, called the Nissan Skyline GT-R. This car proved to be iconic for Nissan, achieving much fame and success on the road and in motorsports.
The GT-R is an entirely new model sharing little with the Skyline GT-R, except its signature four round tail lights. Like some later generations of the Skyline GT-R, the GT-R has the ATTESA E-TS all-wheel drive system with a twin-turbocharged 6-cylinder engine. But the HICAS four-wheel-steering system was removed and the former straight-6 RB26DETT engine was replaced with the new VR38DETT engine. Despite the GT-R's heritage, the chassis code for the all-new version is CBA-R35 and for later model years DBA-R35 and 4BA-R35, or R35 for short (where CBA, DBA and 4BA stands for the emissions standard prefix), carrying on the naming trend from previous Skyline GT-R generations.
The GT-R also retained its predecessor's nickname, Godzilla, originally given to it by the Australian motoring publication Wheels in 1989 for its R32 generation model.
Development
In 1999, as a result of the Renault–Nissan Alliance, Carlos Ghosn was appointed as the new CEO of Nissan. After his appointment, he told the designers and engineers of Nissan to create a new GT-R, as he determined that a new GT-R would be a success for Nissan. He wanted the GT-R to provide an overall high level of performance – no matter how much time and money it would cost. Also, it should outperform or match the benchmark sports car at the time, the Porsche 911 (997) Turbo, specifically at the Nürburgring. In response, designers and engineers estimated they would need four or five years to develop such a high-performance sports car, because it should be made on an innovative platform along with a lot more other technologies. Nissan started development of the GT-R in a mindset of "A Supercar for Anyone, Anywhere, Anytime". In 2001, Ghosn announced the development of the GT-R when a concept was revealed at the 2001 Tokyo Motor Show. At the 2003 Tokyo Motor Show, he announced that the production version would make its debut in the fall of 2007.
For the design perspective, Ghosn wanted four round taillights to be fitted to the new GT-R, just like in its predecessors; he claimed it always been the signature of the GT-R. Overall development began in the year 2000, with Nissan designers from Japan, United States and Europe began to create new sketches for the GT-R. 50 of them made through to Nissan's design director Shiro Nakamura. He claimed the new GT-R's design should reflect not only the modern sports car look, but also the Japanese culture and its predecessor's heritage. Chief designer Hiroshi Hasegawa required more than four years to complete the new GT-R's interior and exterior design. He claimed it should look sporty, modern and also be aerodynamic to create downforce.
Nissan handed over the mechanical and technical development of the GT-R to the chief engineer of the Skyline GT-R R34, Kazutoshi Mizuno (also known as Mr. GT-R). But Mizuno rejected it at first, because he was told to make it on the Nissan FM platform. He said, "I couldn't make a world class performance car from this platform as Ghosn requested". In April 2003, Mizuno created a GT-R prototype which was made on an advanced version of the Nissan FM platform, named as Nissan Premium Midship (PM) platform. In November 2003, Ghosn handed over the full authority of the development to Mizuno. In January 2004, Mizuno began development of the GT-R with a special development team and a full scale GT-R model; the project was under the overall control of Ghosn.
At the time, while aerodynamics development was continuing at Nissan's wind tunnel, Mizuno bought some GT-R test mules to racetracks such as the Nürburgring and Sendai Hi-Land Raceway, which helped to aid development of the drivetrain, suspension and brakes. Those test mules were powdered by a brand new 3.8 L twin turbocharged V6 (VR38DETT) engine, which was developed by Nissan's chief powertrain engineer, Naoki Nakada. Mizuno claimed his goal was to build the GT-R so as to be able to talk with a passenger while driving it at 300 km/h (190 mph). Also, some of the technical parts of the GT-R, such as using Brembo brakes and Bilstein suspension were originally designed by Mizuno himself. Technical development was finalized along with the aerodynamics development, and testing began in several countries with different road and weather conditions.
Aerodynamic development of the GT-R began in early 2004 with a group of the company's best engineers − including the developer of the Nissan's successful Le Mans prototypes, Yoshi Suzuka. Development began with an internal design competition between Nissan's design studios at Atsugi and Tokyo in Japan, London in the United Kingdom and La Jolla in the United States. Nissan received more than 80 sketches from the respective design studios and 12 of them were chosen by Nissan with the help of design director, Shiro Nakamura. Those 12 sketches were whittled down to 3 models and tested in a wind tunnel by GT-R's exterior designers. Nissan wanted the aerodynamic level of the GT-R, which can aid great stability for the car, to create enough downforce while maintaining low drag to improve fuel efficiency and acceleration. The target of the team was to make the GT-R have a drag coefficient of Cd=0.28 or lower, combined with front and rear downforce, which was not done by any other manufacturer at the time. Engineers considered it would be easier to achieve it by using active aerodynamics. Later, the idea was rejected, even though the car's price would be higher than the price Nissan planned to offer.
In August 2004, Yoshi Suzuka and Ken Nambo began wind tunnel testing at Nissan Technical Center in Atsugi, Japan. In 3 months, they tested the three 1⁄4 scale models approximately 300 times and got positive results from their further development. They then decided to replace them by two 40% scale models, one for the development of the GT-R and another one for the Nissan Skyline V35/Infiniti G35 coupe test mule which was built for testing at the Nürburgring. After some wind tunnel runs with this scale model, the result was a Cd=0.32. Later, the car's exterior designers, Hirohisa Ono and Masato Taguchi, joined to aid further development. The joint team tweaked some exterior parts of the GT-R, such as the front nose height, even though engineers couldn't improve the overall aerodynamics as much as they expected.
Yoshi Suzuka considered how to improve the internal airflow of the car, which required changing the design of the car's chassis frame. He requested that the chassis department lower the frame rails as low as the passenger compartment, which could eliminate transition and smooth airflow under the car. The team later used a CFD program for the wind tunnel testing, which helped to upgrade several parts of the car that could smooth the airflow to reduce drag. After one and a half years of development and more than 2000 wind tunnel runs, engineers were finally able to get a stylish exterior with a Cd=0.27 combined with front and rear downforce.
Engineers and designers required more than five years to complete the overall development of the GT-R. Following its design finalization in 2006, testing took another year to be finalized. Afterwards, Nissan announced the production version of the GT-R will be introduced at the 2007 Tokyo Motor Show. Ghosn estimated that sales of the GT-R would be profitable for Nissan. Following the rumours that the GT-R would be sold as an Infiniti model in the North American market, he confirmed the GT-R will be sold as a Nissan model worldwide.
Concepts
Nissan surprisingly unveiled the GT-R concept without an announcement at the 35th Tokyo Motor Show in 2001. Previewed as the 21st-century GT-R which will be sold worldwide unlike its predecessors which were sold only in least numbers of markets. This concept features an aggressive, muscular, wide and low exterior look. while in inside of the concept featured, deep seating, full-length center console, integrated structural cage and a driver's command center.
Nissan unveiled a redesigned version of the 2001 concept, named as the GT-R Proto, at the 2005 Tokyo Motor Show. This prototype featured redesigned exterior elements over the concept car to improve overall airflow and the identity of the GT-R. Including, a redesigned front air intake, front fenders with a new air vent behind it and the sides of the body were sculptured towards the rear fenders, no technical informations revealed for the both concept and the prototype. Officials said the production GT-R would be 80 to 90% based on this prototype.
Testing
Even though the overall development of the GT-R finalized around 2006, Nissan continued testing all over the world in different road surfaces and weather conditions. In late 2005, a GT-R test mule was spied being testing at the Nürburgring, based on a highly modified Nissan Skyline V35/Infiniti G35 coupe, which was used for the aerodynamics development of the GT-R. It had a slightly more acute roofline, hood air scoops, widened body with flared fenders, rolled out rear quarter panels and bigger dual exhaust pipes. In late 2006 and early 2007, Nissan were spied testing GT-R test mules which were seemed to be like near production vehicles alongside a Porsche 911 Turbo (997) on the Autobahn, on roads in New Mexico, Arizona and California and racetracks such as in the Nürburgring, WeatherTech Raceway Laguna Seca, Sendai Hi-Land Raceway and Sonoma Raceway. At the Laguna Seca, the GT-R posted an unofficial lap time of 1:39.62 minutes, a time marginally faster than the 911 Turbo, which was timed at 1:39.89 minutes. Also, some test mules spied testing on snow in Japan.
In a test session at the Sendai Hi-Land Raceway, Ghosn joined the test team to directly test the GT-R against the 911 Turbo. Following the session, he complimented the test team for their effort to build the GT-R in the way he wanted it to be built. Also, in a test session at the Nürburgring, Nissan invited automotive magazine journalists from magazines such as Car and Driver, Evo and others, to test drive both the GT-R and the 911 Turbo around the Nürburgring, Autobahn and country roads. Journalists praised the GT-R for its grip, handling and acceleration. In a later testing session, Mizuno's team achieved a 7:38 minute lap time around the Nürburgring Nordchleife. They claimed it was done in wet conditions, and the car could be even quicker in  favorable weather.
Production
Production model
The production version of the GT-R was unveiled at the 2007 Tokyo Motor Show as scheduled, right after an on-screen 7:38 minute lap time around the wet. Its Nürburgring Nordschleife lap times were broadcast, and it beat the Porsche 911 (997) Turbo as Nissan stated before introducing the car, being the 7th fastest lap time for a production vehicle around the track. In November, 2007, Nissan revealed that the GT-R had already had a considerable demand, as more than 3,000 buyers have pre-odered the car in Japan before its official launch. They also expected to sell around 200 units per each month with deliveries to begin in December, 2007 in Japan. The GT-R launched in the Japanese market on December 6, 2007. The U.S. official launch was seven months later on July 7, 2008, as a 2009 model year. The first production GT-R was owned by Nissan's CEO at the time, Carlos Ghosn. Universal Nissan in Los Angeles provided a customer with the delivery of a new GT-R, fresh from the production line at 12:01 am, on July 7, 2008. The Canadian launch was also in July 2008. Europe became its third market, where it was launched in March 2009. The large disparity in initial marketing between these regional releases was due to Nissan having to build GT-R performance centers where the car was serviced.
2010 update
For the 2010 model year, Nissan updated the GT-R by increasing the engine power output to 362 kW (492 PS; 485 hp). While it had no improvement in engine torque, the launch control system was reprogrammed to reduce stress in the transaxle, also offering the modification  for already sold 2009 models. Other upgrades included: re-tuned suspension, updated wheel finish, standard front seat and side curtain air bags.
2011 facelift
In 2010, for the 2011 model year, the GT-R was revised, and was codenamed as "DBA–R35", replacing the original "CBA–R35". The revised version featured the same engine with an altered mapping, changed valve timing, larger inlets and a modified exhaust system which boosts rated power to 395 kW (537 PS; 530 hp) and 607 N⋅m (448 lb⋅ft) of torque from 3,200 to 6,000 rpm. Upgrades also included: an even more rigid front strut bar made out of carbon composite, larger front brake rotors, lighter and stiffer wheels, and revised Dunlop tyres. Cosmetic changes include; a new front bumper with integrated LEDs, which improves radiator cooling and front brakes while reducing drag; A new rear diffuser, which improves downforce and additional rear cooling ducts were also added to the car. The interior was revised to improve quality. The new model was offered with a new HDD CarWings navigation system, with enhanced entertainment features and a USB port with iPod connectivity. The revised GT-R went on sale in Japan in mid-November 2010 and February 2011 in Europe, North America, and other regions.
In late 2011, Nissan put GT-R mechanicals into the Nissan Juke-R. Up to 23 vehicles were planned. A total of five cars were built by RML – two were wrecked, one left hand drive vehicle was produced for a customer and two were held by Nissan, in which one was a left hand drive, while other one was a right hand drive. It was not put into production.
2013 update
In 2012, for the 2013 model year, Nissan upgraded the GT-R with increased power output to 406 kW (552 PS; 544 hp) and 628 N⋅m (463 lb⋅ft) of torque from 3,200 to 6,000 rpm, new flywheel housing and retuned suspension.
2015 update
Along with the GT-R Nismo unveil at 2013 Tokyo Motor Show, Nissan introduced the 2015 model year GT-R, which had significant improvements over the previous model year. Engine power remained as same as the 2013 model year, but upgraded the suspension setup with revised settings, which led to reduce load fluctuation between four wheels, better stability and more consistent grip. The tyre contact was improved with optimized electronic controls of the shock-absorber valves. Additionally, re-tuned front stabiliser spring rates and bush links, re-tuned brake system for more stopping power, as well as the steering was also been fine-tuned for better and easier handling. Cosmetic changes include, new 20-inch alloy wheels and LED headlights and taillights with Adaptive Front-lighting System (AFS). Nissan claimed these improvements led the GT-R to gain more straight-line and cornering stability, better ride quality without sacrificing its acceleration and cornering performance.
2017 facelift
In 2016, for the 2017 model year, the GT-R was facelifted and re-codenamed as "4BA–R35", which had the same twin-turbocharged 3,799 cc (3.8 L; 231.8 cu in) V6 VR38DETT engine, but increased engine output to 421 kW (572 PS; 565 hp) at 6,400 rpm and 633 N⋅m (467 lbf⋅ft) at 3,200–5,800 rpm, maximum speed of the engine (redline) was also increased from 7,000 to 7,100 rpm. The transmission system was also refined to shift gears smoothly and quieter than before. Other upgrades include; new front and rear bumpers, improving cooling and downforce; entire interior was offered with a new leather material, including a new steering wheel; new 8-inch display infotainment system with a redesigned carbon-fibre center console; 20-inch 15 spoke forged aluminium wheels; re-tuned suspension system; a titanium exhaust system and upgraded braking system. Nissan claimed these updates led the GT-R to have a better ride quality, increased acceleration at mid to high rpm ranges (3200 rpm and above) and increased cornering performance. These updates were also applied to the Track Edition and Nismo variants.
2020 update
In 2019, for the 2020 model year, Nissan updated the GT-R again with minor upgrades, such as a re-tuned transmission to shift gears in just 0.15 seconds, a new lightweight forged aluminium alloy wheels, new interior and exterior colour options including the Bayside Blue body colour which was used in the Skyline GT-R R34.
Discontinuation
After the GT-R T-spec was unveiled, the GT-R was not sold as a 2022 model year in North America. However, in Japan and other markets the GT-R sold a 2022 model. Nissan stopped offering the GT-R in Australia and New Zealand from October 31, 2021, due to the car no longer been eligible for the new Australian side impact regulations. Nissan have sold 1,021 units in Australia and 89 units in New Zealand, a total of 1,110 units sold for the Australian market in a time period of 12 years since its debut in April 2009. following the Australian market sales termination, deliveries for the European market and the United Kingdom were also stopped from March 2022, due to the car being unable to meet new noise regulations which took effect in June 2022. In a 13-year sales period since March 2009, Nissan sold more than 11,000 units in Europe.
On May 2022, Nissan officially concluded orders for the GT-R in the Japanese domestic market, as they had reached the planned sales amount. Around 14,500 units were sold since December 2007 in Japan. Following the Japanese sales discontinuation, it was revealed the GT-R was no longer on sale in North American and African markets, as the Nissan USA, Nissan Canada, and Nissan South Africa official websites claimed the GT-R was sold out, meaning that the GT-R was no longer available anywhere. Around 15,000 units were sold since 2008 in North America. German automotive magazine Auto Motor und Sport claimed the GT-R was no longer in production, as production for the 2022 model year was completed. Approximately 40,000 units were sold worldwide.
Reintroduction
Nissan resumed production of the GT-R for the 2023 model year (skipping the 2022 model year). No changes were reported compared to the 2021 model.
Sales
From 2007 to 2022 Nissan produced around 40,000 GT-R units and sold in various different markets worldwide, which was one of the highest sales for a standalone generation production sports car.
Overview
Engine
The Nissan GT-R was powered by the exclusively developed VR38DETT engine, a 3,799 cc (3.8 L; 231.8 cu in) 60° degree DOHC V6 engine with plasma transferred wire arc sprayed cylinder bores. Two parallel Ishikawajima-Harima (IHI) turbochargers provide forced induction. Models manufactured between 2007 and 2009 are rated at a manufacturer-claimed engine output of 358 kW (487 PS; 480 hp) at 6,400 rpm and 583 N⋅m (430 lb⋅ft) at 3,200–5,200 rpm. The engine also meets California Air Resources Board Ultra Low Emission Vehicle (ULEV) standards. The VR38DETT featured 24 valves controlled by dual overhead camshafts (2 per cylinder head) with intake only variable valve timing. The engine block made out of cast aluminium which is 0.15 mm (0.0059 in) plasma-sprayed cylinder liner bores. This coating provides a hard protective layer which reduces the friction for the piston rings to slide on when the piston moves up and down during the power cycle. The IHI turbocharger's turbine housing is integrated into the exhaust manifolds to decrease weight and improve vehicle balance. Also, this engine featured a pressurized lubrication system controlled thermostatically. The VR38DETT has a feedback control system which changes air fuel ratio depending on the engine load which reduces fuel consumption. Fully equipped with catalytic converters, turbochargers, all of the engine accessories, front differential assembly and turbo outlet pipes, the engine weighed 276 kg (608 lb). Notable features of the VR38DETT includes,
The engines were hand built by only five specially trained mechanics called "Takumi Craftsmens" in a dust proof, temperature controlled room at Nissan's Yokohama plant, their names were badged on every GT-R engine. Each engine took around 8.3 hours and 300 components to be fully assembled, around 13 engines were built every day in a single shift. The cars were built at Tochigi plant on a shared production line. Before the production finalization, every single GT-Rs were test driven by a professional driver around Nissan's test track.
Drivetrain
The GT-R was the first rear mounted independent transaxle all-wheel-drive vehicle. Also, had an exclusively developed, rear mounted, six-speed BorgWarner designed GR6Z30A type, dual-clutch automatic transmission. Hand built by Takumi Craftsmans in a specialized room, similar to the engine assembly room at Nissan's Aichi Kikai plant in Nagoya. The GT-R was one of the fastest gear shifting production vehicles, as it shift gears in just 0.15–0.2 seconds, this particular DCT gearbox was used in conjunction with the unique ATTESA E-TS system, to provide power to all four wheels, along with Nissan's Vehicle Dynamics Control (VDC) to aid in stability. Three shift modes can also be selected from the drive mode selector for various conditions, the "R-mode" was allowed to use the maximum performance of the six-speed dual-clutch transmission, the "Normal-mode" was recommended for normal daily drives and the "Safe-mode", converting the car more fuel efficient and was also recommended while driving on slippery surfaces, such as on snow or ice.
The ATTESA ET-S all-wheel-drive system was an updated version of the ATTESA E-TS Pro, was used in older Skyline GT-R models. This was a rear biased all-wheel-drive system, helping the GT-R for its incredible handling and stability at high speeds. In normal conditions, this system provides 100 percent power to the rear wheels through the main carbon-composite propeller shaft. In conditions, such as heavy acceleration and cornering, the separated additional propeller shaft sends the torque to the front differential. The front differential splits the torque between the left and right front wheels. Resulting a 50:50 percent front to rear power distribution. The rear differential was built inside the transaxle unit. The GT-R has two mechanical limited slip differentials in both front and rear axles. An open type in the front and 1.5 way multi-disc differential in the rear. Those slip differentials could split the torque for each wheels depending on the conditions. The entire drivetrain of the GT-R was lowered to the ground, In order to lower the center of gravity, which helps to improve car's handling and overall stability.
Chassis
The GT-R had a curb weight of 1,740–1,785 kg (3,837–3,935 lb) distributed 54 percent to the front and 46 percent to the rear. The chassis of the GT-R was made out of Alcoa aluminium, also used for the hood, trunk and doors, while die-cast aluminium was used for front shock towers and inner door structures. Outer body panels were stamped using a multiple-strike coining process in oder to add rigidity and precision. Also, side curtain airbags were placed from using this jig welded steel chassis. The chassis was stiffened with a carbon-composite front cross member/radiator support. The GT-R was the only model built on Nissan's Premium Midship (PM) platform, an evolution of the Front Midship (FM) architecture introduced in the 2001 (V35) Skyline. It was a hybrid unibody, assembled on ultra-low-tolerance jigs similar to those used in race car construction.
The GT-R featured an active suspension system, which contained Bilstein monotube shock absorbers and split forks, allowing the drive axle to the attachment point on the lower control arm (LCA). Without the use of torque tubes, the suspension system can operate independently while optimizing weight distribution and maximizing tyre grip at each corner, distributing equal amount of grip on each wheels. Onboard computers adjusts the suspension units per every one hundredth of a second. The GT-R was the first production vehicle to contain this suspension system. The Damp Tronic system allows the driver to select three different suspension modes from the drive mode selector, the "R-mode" for maximum performance required on the track and dragstrip, the "Normal-mode" for daily driver use and the "Comfort-mode", which softens the dampers and provides a comfortable ride, recommend for conditions such as long-distance driving. The Vehicle Dynamic Control (VDC), also can be changed for three different modes. The "R-mode" to use at faster driving conditions, such as on track and dragstrip, tis lowers the traction control but doesn't turn off the electronic stability control. The "Normal-mode" for daily driver use and the "Off-mode", which would turn off the electronic stability control (ESC). Also, the GT-R had 20-inch 15-spoke forged lightweight alloy wheels manufactured by RAYS, which were wrapped with specially developed Bridgestone Potenza RE070R run-flat tyres and Dunlop SP Sport Maxx GT 600 DSST CTT run-flat tyres in later models. Each wheels featured a knurling around the inside of the rim, in order to keep the tyres from slipping on the rim under heavy acceleration and braking.
The GT-R had Brembo monoblock ventilated brake calipers, 15.35-inch, six-piston up front and 15.0-inch, four-piston in the rear, which were full floating, cross drilled two piece rotors, fitted with low steel and high stiffness brake pads. In some special variants of the GT-R, carbon-ceramic brake rotors were offered, which were the largest brake rotors ever fitted to a Japanese production vehicle.
Exterior
Nissan then–chief creative officer and chief design director, Shiro Nakamura, has likened the new GT-R to the giant robots of the Gundam series. Nakamura stated: "The GT-R is unique because it is not simply a copy of a European-designed Sports car; it had to really reflect Japanese culture". Nissan's American designers sculpted the rear three-quarters of the vehicle, while their European designers sculpted the roofline.
Nissan have developed a 6-stage paint process with a double clear coat and chip-resistant paint for use in critical areas of the GT-R chassis. An optional liquid-effect finish employs a hand-polished 8-stage process with product-specific colours, such as the original Super Silver metallic paint, with three layers of clearcoat.
The GT-R featured an overall muscular, sharp and boxy design, resuling a high-downforce, less–draggy body design, achieved by making the air flow smoother though the overall body. Up front, NACA ducts were placed on the hood, which scoops in clean air in order cool the engine compartment. Side front fender air vents also improved the car's aero performance by improving airflow around the tyres, while cooling the engine, front bumper edges were sharpened and featured air ducts and vents to improve downforce while cooling the brakes. Overall front end of the GT-R featured an aggressive look, while the rear end continued the GT-R heritage, specially from carrying over those four round taillights of its predecessors. Additionally, the rear end featured air ducts and vents for brake cooling and generates a smoother air flow, a body-coloured rear spoiler, whereas some special editions had a dry carbon-fibre rear spoiler, in order improve rear downforce. The GT-R had a 315-litre rear boot, an under body made out of carbon-fiber panels, which smoothened the air flow under the car. The overall body of the GT-R was made out of steel, aluminium and carbon-fiber.
Additionally, the production and special edition models were fitted with (LED) headlights, automatic on/off headlights, LED daytime running lights, LED taillights and brake lights, dual-heated body-colour power wing mirrors, power-folding side mirrors, flush-mounted aluminium door handles, four 5-inch titanium exhaust outlets with polished tips and UV-reducing solar glass. All GT-R variants had a drag coefficient of Cd=0.26, which was the lowest drag coefficient for a production sports car at the time, helping to be more fuel efficient and also to be one of the fastest accelerating production vehicles.
Interior
The GT-R had a hand stitched leather interior, embedded on the dashboard, steering wheel, door panels, center console, and front and back seats. Motor Trend claimed the GT-R had one of the most finely crafter interiors. Also, carbon-fiber was used in the center console and in the gauge cluster, which featured an analog speedometer, tachometer which had a redline at 7,000 rpm, fuel meter, digital gear display and another digital display featuring traveling speed, fuel economy and distance calculations. GT-R badged steering wheel contained volume controls and cruise control buttons. Magnesium paddle shifters were also can be found on the wheel column in earlier models and on the steering wheel in 2017 facelifted models and newer models.
The instrument cluster was angled towards to the driver, which contained air conditioning controls, audio set-up controls and drive mode selectors of transmission, suspension and VDC. Center console contained the engine start/off button, leather–wrapped shift liver, parking brake and an openable armrest with a small storage area inside and a USB port. The GT-R also had an 11-speaker Bose sound system.
Polyphony Digital, creators of the Gran Turismo series of motor racing video games, were themselves involved in the development of the GT-R, having been contracted to design the GT-R's multifunction display. This multifunction display featured a detailed log of the driving behavior, speed, g-force, fuel economy and more. Also, details of mechanical information such as the turbo boost, water and engine oil pressure, transmission oil, front and rear drive distribution and others, steering angles, braking and acceleration pressure and optimal gearshift mapping for the best fuel economy, satellite navigation and audio controls.
Variants
SpecV
Nissan introduced the GT-R SpecV on January 7, 2009, at the 2009 Tokyo Auto Salon. This version used carbon fibre trim inside and out, and had no rear seats. In addition, a new colour was introduced limited to the SpecV, LAC Black Opal, The car came with Bridgestone Potenza RE070R street tyres. The GT-R SpecV was powered by the standard twin-turbocharged 3,799 cc (3.8 L; 231.8 cu in) V6. A new high gear boost controller that allows a temporary increase in boost pressure from the IHI twin turbochargers, now larger than those on the standard GT-R, delivering 20 N⋅m (15 lb⋅ft) more torque than the standard GT-R in mid to high-range revs. Other mechanical changes include a titanium exhaust, Recaro bucket seats, reworked suspension, carbon ceramic brakes, and 20-inch (510 mm) Nismo wheels. Compared to the standard GT-R, overall weight was decreased by 60 kg (132 lb), rated at 1,680 kilograms (3,704 lb) – making it the lightest GT-R ever built.
Sales began in Japan on February 2, 2009, at seven preselected dealers staffed with specially trained mechanics knowledgeable about racing circuit driving. The SpecV was also sold in Europe and the Middle East. A total of 110 SpecV were built, 77 for Japan, 24 for Europe, 1 for United Kingdom, 7 for Middle East and 1 additional car. Auto Express tested the SpecV and posted a 0–97 km/h (0–60 mph) time of 3.20 seconds, 1⁄4 mile (400 m) time of 11.5 seconds, pulled 1.12 g on the skidpad and 120.2 km/h in the slalom. An earlier tested Chevrolet Corvette C6 ZR1 resulted in an identical slalom speed but a lower 1.06 g on the skidpad. Japanese motor publication Best Motoring, tested the SpecV around the Nürburgring Nordchleife, achieved a lap time of 7:34.46 minutes in a semi–wet condition track surface.
In November 2011, Nismo introduced a performance package, named Track Pack Special Edition, which provides the upgraded accessories of the SpecV version. Including Bilstein adjustable suspension, brake radiator air guide, Rays forged aluminium alloy wheels, carbon fibre front spoiler with air guide, etc. The rear seat was removed in order to reduce weight, and it was also equipped with high friction special anti-skid bucket seat. It went on sale on November 24, 2011, and was exported to other regions in January 2012, was limited to 150 units worldwide.
Egoist
Nissan introduced the GT-R Egoist (known as VVIP Edition in the Middle East) as a luxury version of the GT-R for the 2012 model year, which was only produced in the Japanese, European and Middle East markets only with 43 units (2 VVIP Editions). The new updates to Egoist include; increased engine power output to 537 PS; 530 hp (395 kW) at 6,800 rpm and torque to 607 N⋅m (448 lb⋅ft) at 3,200-5,800 rpm, which helped to improve straight-line performance, as this model can accelerate from 0 to 60 mph in 2.9 seconds, and completes the quarter-mile in 11.2 seconds at 122.7 mph. Interior upgrades include; a Wajima Lacquer steering emblem, exclusive leather and Alcantara suede for instrument panel, console, door trim, rear side, pillar trim and roof trim, new leather interior colour, fabric carpet, leather cleaner, leather car verification case, and leather seats. For the exterior a new dry carbon-fibre rear spoiler was fitted with LED-type high-mount brake light, a titanium muffler, and exhaust system, dedicated emblem, and Rays lightweight forged aluminium wheels with carbon-ceramic brakes.
The VVIP Edition was introduced by Nissan Middle East and it was only sold in the Middle East. VVIP version upgrades include, interior colours among 12 choices (four upper area interior colours and seven lower area interior colours), new racing seats, Wajima Lacquer (Maki-e) emblem on the center of the steering wheel, new Bose precision sound system and dry carbon-fibre rear spoiler. The wheels, front shells, and some other small components were painted with unique gold paint. Nissan sold 35 Egoist units in Japan, 3 in the United Kingdom, 3 in Europe, and 2 VVIP Editions in the Middle East.
Black Edition
In 2012, for the 2013 model year, Nissan introduced the GT-R Black Edition which was offered with exclusive 20-inch Rays wheels and a carbon-fibre rear spoiler. Recaro racing seats were commissioned specifically by Nissan for the Black Edition. The interior was finished in red and black leather, but a beige colour known as 'Pale Ivory' is also available. No mechanical changes are made from the standard GT-R. In a test conducted by Motor Trend, the GT-R Black Edition accelerated from 0 to 60 mph (97 km/h) in 2.8 seconds and completed a quarter-mile in 11.1 seconds at 124.8 mph (200.8 km/h).
The GT-R Black Edition returned with the updated 2017 model year GT-R, but Recaro seats were the only upgrade was offered over the standard GT-R. The Black Edition wasn't offered in the North American market, and offered in countries such as in the United Kingdom as the Recaro Edition.
Track Edition
In 2013, for the 2014 model year, Nissan introduced the GT-R Track Edition (also known as GT-R Track Edition Engineered by Nismo), which was limited for 150 units and offered with no rear seats (saving 10 kg (22 lb) over the Black Edition) and added stiffer suspension, carbon fibre air inlets, titanium exhaust, improved brake cooling, a unique front spoiler, and new black and gray leather Recaro front seats. Motor Trend tested the 2014 model year Track Edition GT-R, achieving 0–97 km/h (0–60 mph) in 2.7 seconds and 1⁄4 mile (400 m) in 10.8 seconds at 201.3 km/h (125.1 mph). The German car magazine Sport Auto achieved a top speed of 333 km/h (207 mph).
At the 2019 New York Auto Show, Nissan introduced the 2020 model year GT-R Track Edition. The car gets its drivetrain from the Nismo GT-R, the VR38DETT engine producing 608 PS; 600 hp (447.5 kW) at 6,800 rpm and 652 N⋅m (481 lb⋅ft) at 3,200-5,800 rpm. Resulting a 20% of increase in acceleration reaction time compared to the previous model year GT-R Track Editions. Other upgrades includes; Nismo tuned independent suspension system, carbon-fibre roof reducing weight, wider Nismo front fenders the standard GT-R, new Rays 20-inch Nismo forged aluminium alloy wheels with Dunlop 255/40RF-20 run-flat SP Sport Maxx GT 600 DSST Nismo-spec tyres, Nismo carbon ceramic brakes and dry carbon-fibre rear spoiler. The updated Track Edition includes re-designed red and black colour treatment for interior with high-grip Recaro bucket seats.
Gentleman Edition
Nissan introduced the GT-R Gentleman Edition in 2012, which was offered only in France and Belgium. Nissan have built 10 units of this model and was based on the 2014 model year GT-R Black Edition, the Gentleman Edition was offered with an exclusive in Grey Squale body colour and featured "Gentleman Edition" badges next to the front fender vents. Other upgrades include; amber red leather upholstery, individually numbered titanium plaque, hand-stitched leather accents and a bespoke sunglass case.
Midnight Opal Special Edition
In July 2013, Nissan introduced the Midnight Opal Special Edition, which was expected to produce 100 units but 115 units were built. The new model's upgrades include; new Midnight Opal paint colour (similar to the colour offered in Nissan Skyline GT-R special editions), carbon rear spoiler (with LED high-mount brake light), increased antifreeze concentration, new RAYS forged aluminium lightweight wheels with a unique hyper titanium colour, Gold aluminium model number plate in engine bay and a new SRS curtain airbag system. Nissan sold 48 units in Japan, 50 in the United States, 3 in Europe, 9 in the Middle East, 1 in Korea and 1 in Taiwan.
Nismo
Nissan introduced the track focused, GT-R Nismo at 2013 Tokyo Motor Show, which was the fastest production vehicle around the Nürburgring Nordschleife at the time, with a lap time of 7:08.679 minutes, driven by Nissan test driver Michael Krumm.
For the GT-R Nismo, power output was increased to 447.5 kW (608 PS; 600 hp) at 6,800 rpm and 652 N⋅m (481 lb⋅ft) of torque at 3,200-5,800 rpm. The 0–97 km/h (0–60 mph) time changed to 2.5 seconds. The gear-ratios did not change in the dual-clutch transmission. The fuel tank capacity was remained as 74 L (19.5 US gal; 16.3 imp gal). Additionally, front and rear brake cooling ducts were added, a full Nismo tuned suspension and brakes were installed, including a hollow 17.3 mm (0.68 in) rear stabilizer bar from the Nismo performance division. Nismo-exclusive Rays 20-inch forged alloys wheels with Nismo-spec Dunlop SP Sport Maxx GT 600 DSST CTT run-flat tyres, standard aluminium trunk lid was replaced with a full carbon-fibre panel, additional spot welds to strengthen the chassis, a larger front splitter with carbon fibre air ducts and a larger carbon-fibre rear wing were added to the special Nismo aerodynamic package. The Nismo edition was also offered with interior changes, including the Recaro bucket seats with black and red colour synthetic suede treatment, instrument binnacle and steering wheel were also covered in with the Alcantara synthetic suede, deletion of the active noise control in the Bose stereo system and red colour accents in the gauge meter. The car was offered with the Nismo-specific low-gloss matte gray paint colour and full titanium exhaust with additional heatsinks. These changes, in aggregate, reduced weight to 1,720 kg (3,792 lb), which was 17 kg (38 lb) lighter than the standard GT-R.
At the 2019 New York Auto Show, Nissan unveiled the 2020 model year GT-R Nismo along with the 50th anniversary GT-R, celebrating GT-R's 50th anniversary. GT-R Nismo was offered with upgrades such as, a new "R mode" gear shifting setting which shifts gears quicker than before, new turbochargers from the GT3 race car to improve acceleration, lighter Rays 20-inch forged alloy wheels with specifically developed Dunlop tyres, GT3-inspired fender vents, lightweight carbon-ceramic brakes which was the largest brake rotors ever fitted to a Japanese production car at the time, new re-tuned suspension, and the roof, hood and fenders were offered in carbon-fibre to reduce weight. Nissan claimed the new GT-R Nismo was faster and more track-focused than previous models, these upgrades led the car to reduce its weight to 1,703 kg (3,754 lb), which was 20 kg (44 lb) lighter compared to the 2017–2019 model year GT-R Nismo.
Motor Trend interviewed Nissan's chief product specialist (CPS) Hiroshi Tamura, he stated the acceleration from 0 to 80 km/h (0 to 50 mph) was quicker by 2.4 m (8 ft), due to improvements in acceleration and the Nurburgring Nordschleife lap time was quicker by 5 seconds, compared to the previous model year GT-R Nismo, due to 5% improvement in cornering force and braking performance. Nissan claimed the car still can accelerate from 0–97 km/h (0–60 mph) in 2.5 seconds, and achieve a top speed of 330 km/h (205 mph). However, in a test conducted by Top Speed magazine, the 2020 model year GT-R Nismo accelerated from 0–97 km/h (0–60 mph) in 2.48 seconds. Also, according to Nissan, the upgraded GT-R Nismo was 2.5 seconds quicker than the previous model year around their test track.
A special post-production package for the GT-R Nismo was offered by Nismo, which includes the exact upgrades of the GT-R Nismo, was used to set its lap time around the Nürburgring. The upgrades include, re-programmed ECU, retuned suspension springs and shock absorbers, new anti-roll bars, new front brake pads, a new carbon-fibre front fender with aerodynamic flic, a new carbon-fibre front splitter, and a larger carbon-fibre rear wing with two height and 12 angle adjustment options, new carbon-fibre intercooler pipes, new front and rear limited-slip differentials, new Recaro full-carbon bucket seats and a carbon-fibre bulkhead in place of the back seats. According to Nissan, this package removes 64 kg (143 lb) of weight from the standard GT-R Nismo, and was also offered for the 2017 model year GT-R Nismo. This particular package was offered as the A kit and B kit, in which the A kit had all the upgrades while the B kit only had, the suspension system, brake system, stabilizer bars, all carbon-fibre rear wing, front fenders and front splitter, both ESM and TCM and a driver only bucket seat. In Japan, installation was handled by Nismo Omori factory. In North America and United Kingdom, the conversion was handled by STILLEN and JRM Motorsports respectively.
45th Anniversary Gold Edition
Nissan introduced the limited production 45th Anniversary Gold Edition GT-R, which was based on the premium edition. Ride quality was improved compared to other models, and went on sale in the beginning of February 2015. The car had the same twin-turbocharged 3,799 cc (231.8 cu in) V6 VR38DETT engine with 406 kW (545 hp; 553 PS) at 6,800 rpm and 652 N⋅m (481 lb⋅ft) of torque at 3,200-5,800 rpm. The car was painted in a unique gold-colour paint, called Silica Brass, which was used in the Nissan Skyline GT-R R34 M-Spec. Other upgrades include; a gold-tone VIN plate in the engine compartment, a commemorative plaque on the interior center console, new LED headlights, taillights, and brake lights, fully black coloured interior, new 20-spoke Rays wheels finished in black colour and the limited production vehicle number plate under the hood. Nissan built 80 units of this edition, sold 25 in Japan, 27 in United States, 5 in United Kingdom, 2 in Mainland Europe, 16 in Middle East, 4 in Australia and one additional car for testing and press use.
GT-R50
To celebrate GT-R's 50th anniversary, Nissan announced in 2019, that they will introduce a limited-production GT-R called the GT-R50. Only 50 cars were expected to be produced. The GT-R50 shared its powertrain with the GT-R Nismo but was rated at 530 kW (721 PS; 711 hp) and 780 N⋅m (575 lb⋅ft) of torque. Upgrades to the engine include; large diameter turbochargers shared with the GT3 specification GT-R, a heavy-duty crankshaft, pistons and connecting rods, a modified intake system, a new exhaust system, a recalibrated gearbox, and a reinforced differential. The rear suspension system used Bilstein continuously variable dampers and carbon-ceramic brakes. The GT-R50 was offered with 21-inch carbon-fibre wheels and Michelin Pilot Super Sport tyres. The design of the bodywork was a result of a collaboration between Italdesign and Nissan, with the former celebrating its 50th anniversary in 2018. Construction of the bodywork is mainly made out of aluminium and carbon-fibre. It was originally shown as a concept car not intended for production. Nissan claimed, production of those 50 units was delayed until 2020, due to modifications required to make it road legal.
The design was developed by a team of Nissan's European and American designers and has been described as a "car within a car". The front and back sections were designed so they appear to be emerging from the bodywork. Key design elements include a redesigned rear section, stretched LED headlamps at the front, a power bulge on the hood, a lowered roofline, and "Samurai blade" cooling ducts behind the front wheels.
The first production version of the GT-R50 was revealed in May 2020 in Italy. It retains all the design elements of the prototype such as the new headlamps, the bumper designs, splitters, rocker panels, active rear wing, hollow taillamps, and dual tailpipes. In July 2022, Nissan stopped accepting orders for the GT-R50, as all of those 50 units were sold out.
Naomi Osaka Edition
Nissan introduced the GT-R Naomi Osaka Edition in September 2018, as a 2019 model year. Nissan described that they offered this car to celebrate the partnership in between Nissan brand ambassador Naomi Osaka. Nissan planned to build 50 units of this particular model with the specifications of the GT-R premium edition. The car was offered with three body colours, including; Midnight Opal, Brilliant White Pearl and Meteor Flake Black Pearl. Both exterior and interior colour optional were chosed by Osaka. Interior colours include; Ivory, Amber Red and Tan with Urban Black coloured seats. Additionally, a Carbon rear spoiler (with LED high-mount brake light), Gold aluminium model number plate in the engine compartment, SRS curtain airbag system, privacy glass, increased antifreeze concentration and dark grey front fender outlet ducts were also offered.
50th Anniversary Edition
Nissan introduced the 50th Anniversary Edition at the 2019 New York Auto Show. The car has the same 3,799 cc (3.8 L; 231.8 cu in) V6 VR38DETT engine with 421 kW (572 PS; 565 hp) at 6,800 rpm and 633 N⋅m (467 lb⋅ft) at 3,200-5,800 rpm. Nissan introduced two-tone exterior colours – bayside (wangan) blue, with white racing stripes, blue accents on the wheel spokes, and pearl white with red stripes and super silver with white stripes also available for the 50th Anniversary Edition GT-R. Also, the car includes; a unique steering wheel and shift knob trim, special embossed seats, Alcantara headliner with unique stitching and Alcantara-wrapped sun visors.
Nismo Special Edition
On April 15, 2021, for the 2022 model year (as a 2021 model year in United States), Nissan unveiled a new, built-to-order, special edition of the GT-R Nismo (known as GT-R Nismo SV in Japan and Australian market) along with the standard GT-R Nismo, both models were limited to 300 units. The Special Edition went on sale in Japan in October 2021. It was offered with the new, Nismo-exclusive, Nismo Stealth Gray body colour, which was inspired by track tarmacs that the GT-R has set records on and competed on. The special edition features a Nismo-exclusive clear-coated carbon-fibre hood, reducing 100 grams of weight compared to the standard GT-R Nismo. The edition-exclusive 20-inch Rays aluminium forged wheels have a red accent that matches existing accents around the body. The new Nissan logo was unveiled on the Nissan Ariya adorns the rear trunk lid and wheel center caps.
The built-to-order special edition used new, high-precision weight-balanced parts including the piston rings, connecting rods, flywheel, crank pulley and valve springs dialed in with tighter tolerances, delivering snappier revs and quicker turbo spooling. Despite each engines were handcrafted by its own takumi technician, the takumi certification plate on the engine was offered in an exclusive red colour. By August 6, 2021, all 300 units were sold out and Nissan stopped accepting orders for the GT-R Nismo and Special Edition from customers. According to Nissan, 99% of customers chose to buy the GT-R Nismo Special Edition.
T-spec
On September 14, 2021, Nissan introduced the T-spec model of the GT-R via its official YouTube channel. T-spec was inspired by words "Trend Maker" and "Traction Master", which were used to represent the first GT-R concept back in 2001. This particular model was limited for 100 units, in which only 50 units were offered in United States, 28 in the Australian market and the rest in other markets. The T-spec had some exclusive upgrades and changes over the standard GT-R premium. Including; Millennium Jade and Midnight Purple exterior colours which were used in Skyline GT-R R34 special editions, exclusive gold and black engine cover, even wider front fenders, carbon-fibre rear spoiler, Rays forged wheels finished in bronze colour, Nismo carbon ceramic brakes, GT-R Nismo air ducts, suspension weight reduction below the springs, T-spec badging in both interior and exterior, new interior with plenty of leather, suede and Alcantara finished in a new colour named Mori Green, increased wheel-rim width for better tyre rigidity and smooth, sensitive handling, exclusive carbon-fibre roof and trunk lid for Track Edition T-spec. The T-spec trim was offered in both premium and Track Edition GT-R trims. Nissan began taking orders from September 15–29, 2021. Sales began in the second half of October along with the GT-R Nismo Special Edition as a 2022 model year (as a 2021 model year in United States).
Bolt Edition
In 2012, an "Usain Bolt" special edition GT-R was built by Nissan and auctioned off to raise funds for charity along with a display model held in Tokyo, Japan. In 2013, another one was built and delivered to Usain Bolt. Bolt's personal car had gray wheels, a "Spec Bolt" badge and a "Egoist" edition white colour style interior. Licence plate was "7300GJ", corresponding to Jamaica. The displayed car had grey chrome wheels but no Bolt Spec badges and a black interior with red accents along the edge of the seat. It had a license plate with the words "MR BOLT" on them. After being displayed, it was moved to the Nissan Heritage Museum, Zama where it was exhibited. Rod Maher of Australia won the auctioned vehicle at the charity eBay auction. This car was delivered as an Australian specification GT-R and had gold wheels, a black interior but no red accents or Bolt Spec badges.
Fastest drift vehicle
Nissan built the fastest drift vehicle with support of Nismo by using a 2016 model year GT-R, which was specifically tuned for the Guinness World Record for the Fastest Drift. The modifications includes, increased power output, now at 1,029 kW (1,399 PS; 1,380 hp), a racecar spec interior, Greddy Trust's tuning setup, new aerodynamic parts, specially tuned TOYO tyres, new Recaro seats and new RAYS lightweight wheels. Tests began at Fuji Speedway in Japan with a professional drifting driver Masato Kawabata. End of the tests, the GT-R broke the record at Fujairah International Airport, UAE. Three attempts were undertaken by the Nissan Middle East's organization. There were three attempts with driver Masato Kawabata for the record, on his third attempt, the car broke the record with a trap speed of 304.96 km/h at a 30-degree angle drift.
Predzilla
The Predzilla GT-R was specially built and based on a 2017 model year GT-R premium edition and donated to the Nashville Predators Foundation. This particular GT-R was the main attraction in the Predators Foundation fundraising auction, as the car was custom-painted in Preds' official colours and graphics and featured a carbon fibre rear spoiler, especially the blue colour painted Rays wheels and a black coloured interior.
GT-R/C
Nissan built this car to celebrate the release of Gran Turismo Sport video game and to mark 20 years of Nissan involvement in the Gran Turismo gaming series. The car was extensively modified to be driven entirely by a DualShock 4 controller. The GT-R/C was controlled by Nismo athlete and GT Academy winner Jann Mardenborough around in a cockpit of a helicopter at the Silverstone National Circuit. On Mardenborough's fastest lap which took 1:17.47 minutes, the car averaged 122 km/h and reached a top speed of 211 km/h. The GT-R/C was fitted with four robots that operate the steering, transmission, brakes, and throttle. Six computers mounted in the rear of the car to update the controls up to 100 times per second.
The unmodified Dual-Shock 4 connects to a micro-computer that interprets the joystick and button signals and transmits them to the cars' onboard systems. The wireless operation had a primary control range of one kilometre. To help Mardenborough judge the vehicle's speed through the corners, a Racelogic VBOX Motorsport sensor was installed to relay speed data to an LCD display in the helicopter cockpit. The GT-R/C was also fitted with two independent safety systems operating on different radio frequencies in order to allow two additional operators to apply full ABS braking and cut the engine in the event of the main operator losing control of the vehicle. In 2018, the Nissan GT-R/C was used in a tour of primary and secondary schools in the UK to promote future careers in STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math) subjects.
McDonald's Tomica Happy Set
On April 15, 2021, Nissan unveiled a one-Off special version of the GT-R Nismo. This one-off was based on the 2022 model year GT-R Nismo Special Edition and wrapped in a gold body colour. In collaboration with McDonald's in Japan, a miniature toy car GT-R Nismo was offered in the “Tomica Happy Set" (a popular McDonald's meal set for children). To promote this, Nissan and McDonald's held a joint event at Nissan's headquarters in Yokohama. The Happy Set was on sale for a limited time in Japan, beginning on April 30, 2021.
Police use
The Nissan GT-R was used as police vehicles by several police departments over the years. Including; the Tochigi Police Department Japan, Abu Dhabi Police, Dubai Police Force in United Arab Emirates and a one-off police vehicle named Copzilla which was shown at the 2017 New York Auto Show. The Copzilla wasn't an in service police vehicle.
Performance
Nissan claimed the 2009 model year GT-R can attain a top speed of 315 km/h (196 mph) however Motor Trend recorded a top speed of 313.8 km/h (195.0 mph). In tests the original production model was shown to be capable of achieving 0-97 km/h (60 mph) times as low as 3.2 seconds using "launch control". Owners expressed concern that duplicating the times achieved in these tests would void their factory warranty. Nissan's chief engineer Kazutoshi Mizuno has indicated that he has never used the term "launch control", which refers to the act of turning off vehicle dynamic control (VDC) and launching the car at around 4,500 rpm. However, Nissan's director of product planning officer, John Wiener stated in an interview with Jay Leno that "we (Nissan) actually offer a 'launch mode'". The GT-R user's manual states that turning off the VDC is only meant for escaping low-traction situations such as mud or snow. However Nissan used to turn off the VDC during hot laps and time attacks. Nissan has re-programmed the 2010 model year GT-R to reduce the engine speed at launch to around 3,500–4,000 rpm with VDC enabled, which is meant to improve acceleration times. The new programming was also installed on old 2009 vehicles still in Nissan's inventory, and is available for existing 2009 vehicles.
The updated GT-R now has a launch mode called "R-Mode Start". Pushing the three buttons up, including the Transmission, Suspension and VDC, the car gets to "R-Mode Start". The system allows a maximum of 4 consecutive hard launches before locking itself out, after which it can be unlocked by driving normally for 2.4 km (1.5 mi). The updated GT-R now combined with the "R-Mode Start" has lowered the 0-97 km/h (60 mph) time to 3.2 seconds, set a Guinness World Record for the fastest accelerating four-seater production vehicle. From Nissan's upgrades done to later model years, acceleration figures, top speed and Nürburgring lap times have been improved.
In 2013, in a joint project of Nissan Russia and LAV Productions, a 2012 model year GT-R set the ice speed record for a production car at the Lake Baikal, southern Siberia, Russia. The record was set by Russian racing driver Roman Rusinov, with a trap speed of 294.8 km/h (183 mph). This lake is considered as the deepest lake of the world. According to Nissan, the record car was in standard specifications with standard Bridgestone tyres.
Official Nürburgring Nordschleife lap times
In 2009 Nissan claimed a lap time of 7:26.7 minutes for the 2009 model year GT-R on Dunlop SP Sport Maxx GT 600 DSST CTT run-flat tyres, it was the fastest four-seater production vehicle and 7th fastest production vehicle around the Nürburgring Nordschleife. Having previously set a time of 7:29 minutes on standard Bridgestone Potenza RE070R street tyres. Porsche has stated Nissan overstated the GT-R's performance in September 2008, claimed they have conducted a test of a factory stock, European market GT-R and achieved a slower time (of 7:54 minutes), apparently implying that the car isn't as fast around this public road as Nissan claimed and/or that their driver isn't as talented as Nissan's. Nissan disputed the former and implied the latter claim in October 2008.
In September 2010, Nissan set another Nürburgring lap time, using the facelifted 2011 model year GT-R. Driven by GT-R's development driver Toshio Suzuki in wet/damp conditions, the car set a lap time of 7:24.22 minutes, this lap time made enough to be the 5th fastest production vehicle around the track.
According to Nissan, the GT-R improved its Nürburgring lap time in October 2012 to 7:19.1 minutes by due to the 2013 model year improvements. Allowing the GT-R to regain its 5th fastest ever production vehicle title around the Nürburgring, equalling the Porsche 911 (997.2) GT2 RS. Nissan claimed that it lost half a second due to traffic, making a potential lap time of 7:18.6 minutes possible.
In February 2013, Nissan opened the new Nismo headquarters in Yokohama. Nissan's then–CEO Carlos Ghosn considered to introduce a track-oriented version of the GT-R, named as GT-R Nismo. He wanted the GT-R Nismo to set the production vehicle lap record at the Nürburgring Nordschleife to be sold as the leading Nismo brand within a year period. On May 18 development began, with Nissan's chief vehicle engineer Noboru Kaneko, who was appointed after the retirement of Kazutoshi Mizuno, led the joint Nismo and Dunlop Tyres effort to achieve it at the Nürburgring.
On June 26, the team began testing with standard GT-R test mules at Sendai Hi-Land Raceway. On July 16, the team visited Nürburgring to collect data and aid development. The team returned to Japan, and built the GT-R Nismo using information and data from that visit to Nürburgring. The aerodynamic development was finalized, following a testing session at Sendai Raceway on July 24.
On September 2, the team returned to the Nürburgring with three GT-R Nismo prototypes (in same specifications of the N-Attack Package) and four drivers, including; Infiniti Red Bull Racing reserve driver, Sébastien Buemi; Nismo brand ambassador and racing driver, Michael Krumm; former German touring car driver, Armin Hahne; and a Japanese racing driver, Tetsuya Tanaka. Team finalized testing of the GT-R Nismo and on September 30, the team was aiming for a lap under 7:10 minutes. All four drivers were offered with 2 laps each, Hahne and Tanaka couldn't get close enough to the target lap time. But Buemi completed a lap time of 7:12 minutes on his first attempt, on his second attempt, he stopped to take some fuel out to reduce weight, and while on the way to complete a lap under 7:10 minutes, the car ran out of fuel, forcing him to abort his lap. Krumm achieved a lap time of 7:10 minutes on his first attempt.
At 4:48 p.m, just twelve minutes before the Nordschleife was scheduled to close, and five minutes before the rain, Krumm completed his second lap time of 7:08.679 minutes and achieved a peak speed of 310 km/h (193 mph) on Dottinger Hohe uphill straight, making it the fastest production vehicle around the track.
After setting the lap record, the Nismo team invited Car and Driver journalist, Tony Quiroga for a lap around the track. Krumm drove the GT-R Nismo with the journalist on passenger seat, and set a lap record for the fastest production vehicle lap time, recorded with a passenger around the track, the record lap time was 7:19.46 minutes with a peak speed of 303 km/h (188 mph) on Dottinger Hohe uphill straight.
Independent Nürburgring lap times
In a test conducted by Drivers Republic of a GT-R and Porsche 911 (997) GT2 resulted in times of 7:56 minutes for the GT-R and 7:49 minutes for the GT2 respectively in partially damp conditions. While the tester had no doubt that the GT2 could achieve the factory time of 7:32 minutes, he couldn't imagine the customer GT-R going faster than 7:41 minutes in spite of the 7:29 minutes of factory claim.
The German magazine Sport Auto achieved a time of 7:50 minutes on the Nürburgring with a car supplied to them by Nissan during an initial short test in 2007 in partially damp condition. In 2009, in a full "Supertest", Sport Auto achieved a lap time of 7:38 minutes around the Nürburgring with a standard GT-R driven by Horst von Saurma, identical to a later "Supertest" Corvette ZR1 time. In a first test with the 2011 facelifted GT-R model, Sport Auto recorded a lap time of 7:34 minutes around the track with a standard customer-spec GT-R, which was also driven by Horst von Saurma.
Note: these tests were done with customer specification vehicles with standard fuel, journalist drivers, traffic and safety systems, such as electronic stability control (ESC).
Lap records
Note: despite better citation shortages, some of these lap times were only considered as lap records for being the fastest lap time recorded around the respective racetrack.
CBA Models
In November 2009, the GT-R set a lap time of 1:27.30 minutes, around the Driving Center Groß Dölln circuit, it was the fastest lap time for a production vehicle at the time. It was done by the German car magazine Auto Bild, in a comparison test, beating the Porsche 911 (997) Turbo.
In December 2009, in an Autocar magazine comparison test of a GT-R, Porsche 911 (997) Turbo and Audi R8, the GT-R managed to set the production car lap record at Castle Combe Circuit, in wet/damp conditions, the record lap time was 1:14.60 minutes, driven by Steve Sutcliffe.
In May 2008, in a test conducted by Best Motoring, the GT-R completed a lap time of 2:07.60 minutes, around the Mobility Resort Motegi circuit, driven by Naoki Hattori, the result was being the fastest production vehicle around the track at the time.
In September 2009, Car magazine conducted a test for the GT-R at Zwartkops Raceway. The car set a lap time of 1:11.55 minutes, the fastest lap time recorded in a production vehicle around at the time.
DBA Models
In January 2011, in a time attack challenge conducted by Best Motoring, the GT-R achieved a lap time of 1:33.808 minutes around Sportsland Sugo circuit, driven by Keiichi Tsuchiya, making it the fastest production vehicle around the track.
In February 2012, Motor Trend conducted a comparison test between the GT-R, Corvette C6 Z06 and Mustang GT500. According to the test results, Randy Pobst drove the GT-R around the Willow Springs-Street of Willow circuit and set a lap time of 1:20.25 minutes. It was the fastest lap time recorded for a production car around the track at the time. In May 2013, the same magazine tested the GT-R Track Edition and broke that lap record with a lap time of 1:19.55 minutes.
In August 2015, Auto Bild tested the GT-R on the 3.8 km course of Contidrom race track. They've achieved a lap time of 1:30.73 minutes, making it the fastest production car around the track.
In August 2015, Auto Express conducted a comparison test between the GT-R and the Skyline GT-R R34 at the Llandow Circuit. The GT-R set a lap time of 45.70 around the track, driven by Steve Sutcliffe, it was fastest lap time recorded in a production vehicle around the track at the time.
In an unofficial testing session, the GT-R reportedly have set the lap record for a production car around the Suzuka International Racing Course, with lap time of 2:18.36 minutes. In 2015 the record was broken by the0 Koenigsegg One:1, which was just eight tenth of a second (0.8 seconds) quicker than the GT-R. However the Koenigsegg One:1 wasn't been able to qualify as a production car, due to only 6 units have been built out the required 25 units.
4BA Models
On November 10, 2016, in a test conducted by Drive Magazine at the Athens Circuit - Megara, the GT-R completed a lap time of 1:06.68 minutes. Driven by Alex Galanopoulos along with a passenger in the car, it was the lap record for a production vehicle around the track at the time.
Nismo
In June 2014, the GT-R Nismo prototype equipped with the N-Attack Package was revealed at the Goodwood Festival of Speed. The car was driven on the Goodwood track by Jann Mardenborough, set a time of 49.27 seconds, making it the fastest production vehicle around the track.
In a pre-testing session of the GT-R Nismo N-Attack Package at the Fuji Speedway, the car set a new production car lap record around the track. Driven by Tsugio Matsuda, set a lap time of 1:50.930 minutes.
On August 13, 2014, the German car magazine Sport Auto tested the 2015 model year GT-R Nismo around the Nürburgring GP 5.15 km circuit, driven by Christian Gebhardt, he took alternative racing lines due to traffic, but managed set the fastest production vehicle lap time around the track with a lap time of 2:13.80 minutes.
In September 2014, Motor Trend conducted a test using the 2015 model year GT-R Nismo at Willow Springs - Street of Willow circuit. Test driver Randy Pobst set a lap time of 1:19.07 minutes, it was the fastest lap time recorded by a production vehicle around track. The 2014 model year GT-R Track Edition held second place with a lap time of 1:19.55 minutes and 2012 model year standard GT-R held third place with a lap time of 1:20.25 minutes for production vehicles around track.
In February 2015, Motor Trend held a comparison test between the GT-R Nismo and Corvette C7 Z06, In the track test, test driver Randy Pobst drove the GT-R Nismo at Willow Springs International Motorsports Prak circuit, and set a new production vehicle lap record around the track, with a lap time of 1:25.70 minutes.
On December 8, 2017, in a test conducted by Nissan for the 50th anniversary of the GT-R, a 2018 model year GT-R Nismo, driven by Kazuo Shimizu, set a lap time of 1.00.293 minutes around the Tsukuba Circuit – making it the fastest production vehicle around the track at the time. On December 9, 2019, Nissan again broke its own lap record for a fastest production vehicle around the track, using an updated 2020 model year GT-R Nismo, driven by Tsugio Matsuda, set a lap time of 59.361 seconds. It was the first production car to lap the circuit under a minute.
In 2018, Nissan Spain conducted a test around the INTA Circuit for a 2017 model year GT-R Nismo, GT-R Track Edition, and a standard GT-R, those three cars were driven by Marc Gené. The GT-R Nismo set a new production vehicle lap record around the track with a lap time of 1:05.83 minutes. The GT-R Track Edition lapped in 1:06.39 minutes and took second place, standard GT-R lapped in 1:06.93 minutes and took third place, for production vehicle lap times around the track.
In a track battle conducted by Best Motoring at Maze Sea Circuit (also known as Nihonkai Maze Circuit), a 2017 model year GT-R Nismo set a new production car lap record around the track with a lap time of 1:03.448 minutes, driven by Keiichi Tsuchiya.
Reception
The Nissan GT-R has been praised by various magazines, television programs, and automotive publications for its ultimate performance capabilities and practicality, continuing its predecessor's nicknames (such as "Godzilla" and "Supercar Killer") since its debut in 2007. The GT-R was known to boast a performance equalling or even exceeding its competitors at around half the price, and possesses extensive aftermarket modifications, tunability and reliability. It also brought highly notable Nürburgring lap times and new technologies to the automotive industry, such as being the first rear-mounted, independent transaxle vehicle, being one of the earliest vehicles to use a dual-clutch transmission and launch control. These led the GT-R to obtain its current recognition in the automotive industry.
Magazines
Motor Trend called the GT-R as, "Godzilla" in their reviews, tests and drag races. In the first acceleration test in 2009, they praised the GT-R's launch control, stating "BAM! The GT-R leaves the line like an arrow from a cross-bow. From the outside, the rear tyres spin for a little over a foot, the fronts never visibly slip. The acceleration screen on the centre dash confirms the test equipment's assertion that longitudinal acceleration of at least 1.0 g persists for almost two seconds. No wonder the forged-aluminium rims have little knurled ridges to keep the tyre beads from slipping." They've also stated that the GT-R "appears to dodge the laws of physics", while criticized for not being offered with a manual transmission and interior quality, they nevertheless named it the 2009 Motor Trend Automobile of the Year.
In Car and Driver's first test, they've given the GT-R a positive verdict, claimed "Prejudged on its specs, the GT-R is winning on appeal", despite of its acceleration, handling, and practicality performance. Edmunds also have praised the GT-R, stating "the Nissan GT-R delivers true supercar performance in a user-friendly package for less coin than a base Porsche 911", also claiming "the GT-R can get you to 60 mph faster than any Ferrari or Lamborghini currently in production".
Top Gear magazine praised the GT-R, stating "This car is the greatest performance bargain of this or any other century, and is one of the most incredible cars of any kind ever built. For the price of a BMW M3, you have a four-wheel-drive, super-high-tech, all-weather, 195mph supercar with tremendous ability on all roads and an almost impossibly cool image. And a boot".
In the first test of Road & Track, they've given a positive verdict for the GT-R, stating "The power from the GT-R's engine is phenomenal. Not because it has so much of it, but because it's delivered in such a smooth, naturally aspirated fashion. The smaller turbos of the GT-R spool up more quickly than the Porsche's, giving the effect of no lag. Its engine note, however, doesn't stir my sensibilities the way the Z06's and the 911 Turbo's do", and also "The GT-R responds best when thrown into corners with gusto. Under braking with a bit of turn to the steering wheel, the GT-R's back end will come into play to help you tighten the corner line a bit, but never so much as to make the car unstable. Steering effort is light, and the all-wheel-drive system takes much of the drama out of exiting corners". Regarding the practicality of the car, the magazine states, "There's plenty of room for a big guy and a back seat that can be used by shorter folks on the occasional run to lunch. The ride is on the harsh side, even with the suspension setting switched to full comfort. The various screens of the monitor are neat, though some of the materials here could be better. But could I spend all day in the car? You bet." In the end, the magazine's verdict about the GT-R was, "fact it wears a Nissan badge — the GT-R might well be considered the most exotic car on the planet".
In the Autocar magazine, Chris Harris criticized the GT-R for having a harsh/uncomfortable ride quality, stating "with the three-way dampers set to hard, it is undriveable", but praised its performance and drivetrain, claimed "There is only one performance car with a better powertrain than the GT-R, and it is made by Bugatti at considerable cost. With the double-clutch gearbox set to automatic you only feel a slight judder from first to second and thereafter it is, for want of a less sickly phrase, seamless" and "there is real sophistication to the way it handles. And, unlike its predecessor, the R35 doesn't just spit you in to oversteer. It simply catapults you away from slow turns". In the end, the motor journalist stated "I want one now! If you can't wait for a UK car some time next year then you'll need to personally import one. But believe me: if you're after the ultimate performance weapon of the moment, there is every reason to. This is the best value performance car on the planet".
TV Series
In series 11 of the British motoring show Top Gear, Jeremy Clarkson praised the GT-R's acceleration by stating, "I think they've put a million horsepower engine, because the acceleration is blistering, it's just savage!". Clarkson also complimented its cornering performance, claimed "they haven't built a new car here, they built a new yardstick" and "it corners faster than electricity". He was forced to end the test prematurely after the GT-R's cornering speed caused him to pull a muscle in his neck at Fuji Speedway.
In another episode of Top Gear, James May tested the GT-R's launch control. Following his first run using launch control, he stated "that's tremendous, I've never gone off the line that well in a car". Clarkson stated "there's no car that accelerates when you look from 30 yards like this one does". In addition, both presenters stated, "I want it".
In an episode of Fifth Gear, Jason Plato praised the GT-R's acceleration and cornering performance, stating "it's a great car, it's fantastic fun, it's great value for money, we like it, we like it a lot".
Jay Leno, in his television show, praised the GT-R's performance and overall practicality as a sports car by stating "I'm starting to feel that I could get emotionally involved with this car... Let me drop it down a gear and see... Check the pull!... OK, I think I'm emotionally involved. Time to call my wife. Honey, I met something, another car. Not to take your place, just something different."
Accolades
Note – some accolades may have not been added to the list.
Motorsport
The Nissan GT-R had momentous success in motor racing, as it have accomplished various championship wins, race wins and podium finishes in noteworthy competitions, such as in the FIA GT1 World Championship, GT World Challenge Europe Endurance Cup, GT World Challenge Europe Sprint Cup, GT World Challenge Asia, GT World Challenge America, GT World Challenge Australia and British GT Championship, along with the Super GT Series, Super Taikyu Series and also in highly competitive endurance races, such as in the Bathurst 12 Hour, Dubai 24 Hour, Nürburgring 24 Hours, Spa 24 Hours, Suzuka 10 Hours, Fuji 24 Hour and significantly more. The GT-R also have given assistance for tuning houses and companies to achieved success in individual motorsports all around the world.
Nissan was the first Japanese automobile manufacturer to sell a Group GT3 race car, as the GT-R Nismo GT3 have sold for various customer racing teams. By the end of 2017, Nismo officially terminated competing in international GT championships, as in interest of entering Formula E, but they resumed providing technical support for customer racing teams, which were in racing with customer-spec GT-R Nismo GT3 race cars.
GT500
Nismo, the motorsport arm of Nissan, entered the GT-R GT500 into the Super GT series in 2008, replacing the 350Z. In 2008, the GT500 version of the car had a completely different drivetrain compared to the production car. The race car was upgraded to the VK45DE 4.5-litre naturally aspirated V8 engine, instead of the VR38DETT engine. It used a 6-speed sequential manual gearbox and a rear-wheel-drive layout from its predecessor, the 350Z GT. A prototype was spotted testing around the Suzuka Circuit as well as at Fuji Speedway in Japan. The car went onto win the opening race of the 2008 season in Suzuka, scoring a one-two finish for Nissan. In the next race, the GT-R GT500 repeated its 1–2 result, won the drivers' championship by the end of the season, through the Xanavi Nismo GT-R GT500, driven by Satoshi Motoyama and Benoît Tréluyer, although they've only came third in the teams' championship. It also won 7 out of 9 races by 4 different teams using GT-R GT500 race cars.
The GT500 version scored 4 victories in the 2009 Super GT Series. In 2010, the VK45DE 4.5-litre engine was replaced by a newly developed VRH34A 3.4-litre engine. In 2011 and 2012, Team Mola GT-R GT500 with drivers Ronnie Quintarelli and Masataka Yanagida got back to back championships in both teams' and drivers' classifications. In 2014, the Super GT regulations were aligned with those of the Deutsche Tourenwagen Masters, and so the V8 engine was replaced with NR20A 2.0-litre, 4-cylinder turbocharged engine, the GT-R GT500 repeatedly won both 2014 and 2015 championships back to back. The GT-R GT500 was retired by the end of 2021 season, due to the regulation changes that made the car uncompetitive since the 2016 season. However, along with its 5 drivers' and 4 teams' championships, the GT-R GT500 has the most wins for a GT500 car in the Super GT history, with 41 race wins (including 2 Suzuka 10 Hours wins) and scored 55 podiums from 113 race starts, making it one of the most successful GT500 race cars of all time. The GT-R GT500 was replaced with the new Nissan Z GT500 for the 2022 season after the model's 15-year absence.
GT300
The GT-R Nismo GT3 made its Super GT Series debut in 2012 at Okayama International Circuit, with drivers Katsumasa Chiyo and Yuhi Sekiguchi. The car scored its first race win in the fourth round at Sportsland Sugo, and scored another podium finish in the following round at Suzuka International Racing Course. By the end of the season, the car was 4th in final standings. The car have won 2015 and 2020 championships. Currently in 2022 season, Kondo Racing GT-R Nismo GT3 leading the GT300 championship, with only 1 race to go.
FIA GT1 World Championship
On February 27, 2009, Nismo announced a partnership with British racing team Gigawave Motorsports to enter a GT-R in four races in the 2009 FIA GT Championship season. The entry did not compete for championship points but was used by Nismo to refine the performance of the GT-R for future customer teams to use the car in the planned FIA GT1 World Championship in 2010. Nismo driver Michael Krumm and Gigawave driver Darren Turner would co-drive the GT1 GT-R. The Sumo Power GT-R won the 2010 RAC Tourist Trophy at Silverstone Circuit as part of the FIA GT1 World Championship on May 2, 2010.
The 2011 season saw Swiss Racing Team switch to Lamborghini which left Sumo Power running four GT-Rs, two under the Sumo Power GT name and two under JR Motorsports. JR Motorsports with drivers Michael Krumm and Lucas Luhr won the Drivers Championship in the 2011 season, achieving 3 wins and 1 pole position in 10 races. The team got second place in the teams' championship, as in the last race the No.23 car retired due to a crash and the No.22 car served a penalty while leading the race and finished in 8th position. End of the race the team was just behind by 3 points than the team's champions.
GT World Challenge Europe Endurance Cup
In 2018, GT-R Nismo GT3 was upgraded and changed compared to previous years, upgrades Includes; a different aerodynamic package; re-tuned suspension, with double-wishbone setup for rear; modified radiators, air inlets, air outlets and intercooler; optional air conditioning system to keep the driver in the perfect condition; re-designed steering wheel and a new center console switch panel. Changes over the previous specification includes; the engine was lowered by 150 mm (5.9 in), thanks to a thin oil pan, implementing a dry sump oil system; entire drivetrain was lowered to the ground; the engine was slightly moved backwards; optimized air flow inside the engine compartment and the driver seating position was also lowered to the ground. These upgrades and changes led the GT-R Nismo GT3; to reduce its weight by around 15 kg (33 lb), which is now rated at around 1,275 kg (2,811 lb); to lower its center of gravity, improving driving stability and handling; and also to improve downforce while reducing drag.
The GT-R Nismo GT3 have competed in the largest GT championship of the world, the GT World Challenge Europe Endurance Cup (previously known as the Blancpain Endurance Series and Blancpain GT Series Endurance Cup). The GT-R Nismo GT3 achieved significant success and fame in this tremendously competitive GT championship.
Despite making its debut in the 4th round of 2011 season at Circuit de Nevers Magny-Cours, the car was not in the championship contention, as only have competed in 4th and 5th rounds of the season. But the car was successful in competition, as driven by Richard Westbrook and David Brabham, the GT-R Nismo GT3 scored an impressive Pro class 6th-place finish and the fastest lap of its debut race. 2012 season was also been similar to 2011, as the car have only competed in 1–4 rounds of the season.
In 2013, the GT-R Nismo GT3 was proved to be successful, as Nissan GT Academy Team RJN's No.35 car was qualified in 4th position and led the first race of the season at Monza. Despite losing time during pit stops, it fell back couple of positions, but managed to finish the race in 6th position in Pro-Am class. In the second round at Silverstone, the GT-R Nismo GT3 scored its first GT World Challenge Europe Endurance Cup pole position and race win. The car was driven by Lucas Ordóñez, Peter Pyzera and Alex Buncombe, it managed to claim overall pole position and the race win in Pro-Am class, and was able to score a double-podium finish in the following round at Paul Ricard, as JRM Racing No.23 car finished the race in 3rd position in Pro class, while Nissan GT Academy Team RJN No.32 car finished the race 2nd in Pro-Am class, resulting in leading the Pro-Am championship. The fourth round of the season, the 24 Hours of Spa, saw Pro-Am championship leading GT-R Nismo GT3 scoring another podium finish, as the car finished the race in 3rd position. In the final round at Nürburgring, Nissan GT Academy Team RJN won the Pro-Am team's championship. Ordóñez won the Pro-Am driver's championship, Pyzera and Buncombe finished 3rd and 4th in the final standings respectively. The GT-R Nismo GT3 ended the season with a race win, pole position and 4 podium finishes.
The team returned for the 2014 season in order to defend their title, while no GT-R Nismo GT3s were entered for Pro class. In the second round at Silverstone, the car No.80 qualified in 3rd position, driven by Buncombe, Nick McMillen and Florian Strauss, they managed to win the race in Pro-Am class after an intense battle with an Aston Martin Vantage GT3. In the third round at Paul Ricard, the car took Pro-Am pole position, but the lap time was deleted, as it was revealed that the car crossed the finish line under red flags, and got penalized to start from 32nd position, the car climbed up positions to finish in class 12th position. However No.35 car found itself on the podium, as it finished the race in 3rd position in Pro-Am class, despite starting 4th on the grid. In the final round at Nürburgring, car No.80 took Pro-Am pole position and led the race in early stages, despite a gearbox issue the car had to pit and lost several grid positions, and finished the race in 14th position, missing out the possible team's championship win. The GT-R Nismo GT3 ended the season 4th in team's championship, tied in points with team AF Corse and 7th in driver's championship, with a race win, pole position and 2 podium finishes.
For 2015 season, GT-R Nismo GT3s were entered in both Pro and Pro-Am classes. In the second round at Silverstone, Nissan GT Academy Team RJN's No.23 car, took overall pole position, but finished the race in 13th position, despite making contact with a back marker car while leading the race. No.22 car scored a podium finish, as it finished the race in 2nd position in Pro-Am class. In the third round at Paul Ricard, the No.23 car, Buncombe, Katsumasa Chiyo and Wolfgang Reip, qualified in 2nd position, and won the overall race. In the final round at Nürburgring, the car qualified in 2nd position and finished the race in 3rd position to score another podium finish, and to win the driver's championship for Buncombe, Chiyo and Reip. Nissan GT Academy Team RJN finished 3rd in the team's championship. Car No.22 achieved pole position in Pro-Am class, but retired from the race due to an incident. The GT-R Nismo GT3 ended the season with a race win, 2 pole positions and 3 podium finishes.
In 2016 season, championship defenders were failed to defend their championship, due to involving in unfortunate incidents at Silverstone, Paul Ricard and 24 Hours of Spa races. In the third round at Paul Ricard, after making contact with another car, the car spun around and dropped back to 31st position, but charged itself to finish the race in 5th position. The GT-R Nismo GT3 ended the season 7th in the team's championship and 9th in the driver's championship with a podium finish at Nürburgring, starting from 11th on the grid.
In 2017 season, GT Academy did not enter for the championship, as Motul joined the team instead, No major achievements were followed in the season, as the car only managed to score points at Paul Ricard by finishing 5th. In the final round at Circuit de Barcelona-Catalunya, the car made an impressive comeback, as it finished the race 13th, despite starting from 46th position. The GT-R Nismo GT3 finished the season 7th in the team's championship.
Nissan did not enter for 2018 season, GT Sport entered instead with upgraded GT-R Nismo GT3s. The car scored a podium finish in Silver Cup class at Silverstone, starting from 7th on the grid. The GT-R Nismo GT3 ended the season 6th in Silver Cup driver's championship. 2019 was the last season that a GT-R Nismo GT3 was entered for the championship, GT Sport Motul Team RJN was replaced by the team KCMG, they wasn't in championship contention that year, as the car was only entered for the 24 Hours of Spa race, where it finished 16th in Pro class.
GT World Challenge Europe Sprint Cup
In 2013, the GT1 Championship was replaced by the GT World Challenge Europe Sprint Cup (previously known as the FIA GT Series and GT Sprint Series/Cup), Nissan GT Academy Team RJN entered the championship with the GT-R Nismo GT3. In the inaugural 2013 season, the car entered in Pro-Am class, scored in class podium finishes in every race it was competed on. But, the car did not entered the final round at Baku World Challenge, as it had to enter for 2013 Dubai 24 Hour race, missing out a possible team's championship win. The GT-R Nismo GT3 ended the season 2nd in team's championship and 5th in driver's championship with 2 wins, 2 pole positions and 10 podium finishes.
The GT-R Nismo GT3 did not enter for the championship in 2014, but entered in 2015, only for the fourth round at Moscow Raceway, Nissan GT Academy Team RJN scored a podium finish, at it finished the race in 2nd position in Pro-Am class. A customer racing team, called MRS GT-Racing/Always Involving Motorsport's GT-R Nismo GT3 finished the season 7th in team's championship and 14th in driver's championship with a podium finish in the second round of the season at Brands Hatch.
In 2016 season, Nissan GT Academy Team RJN entered in both Pro and Silver classes. The car ended the season 4th in Silver class Driver's Championship with 2 podium finishes at Brand Hatch and Hungaroring. It was the last appearance for the GT-R Nismo GT3 in this championship, as the car was never entered by any team after the 2016 season.
GT World Challenge Asia
The GT-R Nismo GT3 only have competed in 2018 GT World Challenge Asia (previously known as Blancpain GT World Challenge Asia). KCMG entered the season in Pro-Am and Silver Cup classes. The car finished the season in 2nd position with 2 wins, 2 pole positions and 7 podium finishes, and in 4th position with a pole position and 5 podium finishes in Pro-Am and Silver Cup classes respectively. The GT-R Nismo GT3 have also finished 4th in overall Team's Championship.
GT World Challenge America
In 2015, Nissan officially entered for the GT World Challenge America (previously known as the Pirelli Word Challenge) as the team AE Replay XD Nissan GT Academy. The car finished in the podium for 7 consecutive times from the Road America to Miller Motorsports Park rounds. Even though, the team only have entered two GT-R Nismo GT3s, the car was able to end the season 4th in driver's championship with 3 wins, a pole position and 8 podium finishes, and 5th in team's championship. The team returned for the 2016 season, and GT-R Nismo GT3 finished the season 5th in driver's championship and 4th in team's championship with 2 wins, a pole position and 7 podium finishes. The team did not enter for 2017 and beyond seasons. But In 2018, teams Nissan Motorsports North America and Always Involving Motorsport entered the championship, but only for the third round at Streets of Long Beach.
GT World Challenge Australia
Despite having only entered for small amount of races in previous years of GT World Challenge Australia (previously known as Australian GT Championship), Hobson Motorsport driver Brett Hobson entered for the 2021 GT World Challenge Australia, in order to fight for the championship. The entered GT-R Nismo GT3 was previously used by Nissan for the Bathurst 12 Hour race, and it entered the competition under GT Trophy class. In the opening first race at Phillip Island Grand Prix Circuit, the car scored a podium finish, as it finished the race 3rd in class and 7th in overall positions. In the second race, the car scored its first in class race win of the season, finished 4th in overall positions. In the second round at Mount Panorama Circuit, the car finished on the podium, as it finished the race 3rd and 8th in overall positions, started from pole position in GT Trophy class. The car did not start the second race. In the following round at The Bend Motorsport Park, the car qualified 3rd and 6th in class and overall positions respectively. In the race, the car made enough positions to win the overall race with the fastest lap of the race. In the second race, the car retired after racing for 5 laps, due to a gearbox issue. The car was refreshed entirely and returned to the championship deciding final round at Mount Panorama, and it paid enough for the car, as it dominated the whole race weekend with back-to-back wins and pole positions. In the first race, the car took pole position and won in class, 3rd in overall positions. In the second and final race of the season, it took pole position again and won in class, 2nd in overall positions with the fastest lap of the race. Even though the car failed to start and retired from couple of races, it made an impressive comeback to finish 2nd in final standings, just 8 points behind the championship winning Audi R8 LMS ultra. The GT-R Nismo GT3 ended the season with 4 wins, 3 pole positions and finished evey race in the podium to score 6 podium finishes. The team returned for the 2022 season, only for the first round at Phillip Island Grand Prix Circuit, where it took pole position under GT Trophy class and finished 2nd and 3rd positions in the first and second races respectively.
British GT Championship
The GT-R Nismo GT3 made its British GT Championship debut in 2012, entered by RJN Motorsport with drivers Alex Buncombe and Jann Mardenborough. The car scored its first pole position and podium finish in the first round at Nürburgring. In the fourth round at Brands Hatch, the car scored its first race win after starting 10th on the grid. The car scored another podium at Snetterton Circuit, after finishing the race in 3rd position. The GT-R Nismo GT3 ended the season 6th in final standings with a win, pole position and 3 podium finishes. In 2013, JRM Motorsport entered the championship instead, only for the first and second rounds of the season. Nissan GT Academy Team RJN entered for the 2014 season,  in the fifth round at Circuit de Spa-Francorchamps, they finished the race in 2nd position to score a podium finish. Since then, 2018 was the first and final season, a GT-R Nismo GT3 was fully entered for a British GT Championship. RJN Motorsport entered the championship under Silver Cup class, Straun Moore won the championship after taking pole positions and wins in every race it competed on.
Super Taikyu Series
The GT-R Nismo GT3 have proved to be the most successful Group GT3 car in the Super Taikyu Series (also known as the Super Endurance Series), as it have won the championship for 5 times out of the 11 times it was held. The GT-R Nismo GT3 made its Super Taikyu Series debut in the second round of 2012 season at Mobility Resort Motegi, entered by team Threebond Nissan Technical College for testing, it qualified in 3rd position, and returned to the pits after completed 5 laps in the race, driven by Tomonobu Fujii and Gamisan. The car scored its first Super Taikyu Series race win in the fourth round at Okayama International Circuit, driven by Fuji, Gamisan and Katsumasa Chiyo, it crossed the finish line by over 21 seconds ahead of the 2nd-placed BMW Z4 GT3. In the fifth round at Suzuka International Racing Course, the car was able to score 2 podium finishes in both races, as it finished in 2nd and 3rd positions in the first and second races respectively. In the final round at Autopolis, the car had to start the race from the back of the grid, despite some technical issues. In the race, it climbed up positions to score another podium by finishing 3rd. Even though it was not in championship contention, the GT-R Nismo GT3 ended the season with a race win and 5 podium finishes.
The team returned for 2013 season in collaboration with Kondo Racing, additionally GT-R Nismo GT3s was entered by team GTNET Advan and Mach GoGoGo Syaken. In the opening round at Sportsland Sugo, GTNET Advan No.81 car secured pole position, while Threebond Nissan Technical College No.24 car qualified in 2nd position with new track record. The race was suspended, due to bad whether conditions. In the second round at Inje Speedium, the No.81 car scored a podium finish in the second race, as it finished the race in 2nd position. Another podium finish was followed in the third round at Motegi, the car finished the race in 3rd position. The No.24 car took pole position with a new track record, but finished the race 7th with the fastest lap, despite it had to start from the pit lane, due to technical issues. In the fourth round at Fuji Speedway, No.81 car took pole position, ahead of the 2nd-placed No.24 car. Both cars finished the 3rd and 4th respectively, with the fastest lap of the race. In the Okayama race, No.81 car secured pole position again, despite receiving a 30-second time penalty, as it left the pits in red light conditions, it finished the race in 8th position. The No.24 car scored a podium finish, by finishing the race in 2nd position, just 1.5 seconds behind the race winning car. In the sixth round at Suzuka, No.24 car took pole position, finished 2nd, scoring another podium finish in the first race of the weekend. The No.81 car had a successful weekend, as it managed to finish the first race in 3rd position, second race in 2nd position after taking pole position and third race in 3rd position. The GT-R Nismo GT3 scored a total of 4 podium finishes in that weekend. In the final round at Autopolis, the GT-R Nismo GT3 scored a 1–2 finish, as the Mach GoGoGo Syaken No.555 car, driven by Tetsuji Tamanaka and Naoya Yamano won the race and No.81 car finished in 2nd position. The GT-R Nismo GT3 ended the season 3rd in final standings with a win, 7 pole positions and 10 podium finishes.
Starting from the 2014 season, the GT-R Nismo GT3 dominated the Super Taikyu Series for 3 consecutive years until 2017. In 2014 teams, Threebond Nissan Technical College in collaboration with Kondo Racing and GTNET Advan returned to compete in the championship. Team Threebond Nissan Technical College No.24 car, driven by Fujii, Gamisan and Daiki Sasaki, started the season on a high, as it won the opening round at Motegi, starting from pole position. GTNET Advan car No.81, driven by Kazuki Hoshino, Takayuki Aoki and Naofumi Omoto, did not enter for the first round, but still managed to win the second round at Sugo, starting from pole position. The car took pole position again in the third round at Fuji, scored a podium finish by finishing the race in 2nd position. The car took its third consecutive pole position of the season in the fourth round at Okayama, and scored its second win of the season, while the No.24 car scored podium finish, as it finished the race in 3rd position. In the fifth round at Suzuka, the GT-R Nismo GT3 scored a 1–2 finish, as the No.81 car scored its third win of the season, starting from pole position, and No.24 crossed the finish line in 2nd position. In the final round at Autopolis, the car continued in winning the race, it was the fourth win of the season for the No.81 car, starting from its fifth consecutive pole position, meaning it started every race it competed on from the front of the grid. These impressive performances from the No.81 car led Hoshino, Aoki and Omoto to win the 2014 Super Taikyu Series championship. The GT-R Nismo GT3 ended the season with 5 wins, 6 pole positions and 8 podium finishes.
Both teams returned for 2015 season, additionally, Endless Sports and Team Mach also entered with GT-R Nismo GT3s. In the opening round at Motegi, it was a 1–2 finish for the GT-R Nismo GT3, as team Endless Sports No.3 car won the race and Threebond Nissan Technical College Kondo Racing No.24 car finished the race in 2nd position. In the following round at Sugo, No.3 car took pole position, but retired form the race due to an incident. In the third round at Fuji, saw the GT-R Nismo GT3 scoring a 1–2–3 finish, as No.3 car won its second race of the season, No.24 car finished the race in 2nd position and Team Mach No.5 car scored its first podium finish of the season, by finishing in 3rd position. In the following round at Autopolis, championship defending GTNET No.1 car took pole position, despite having a technical issue, it retired from the race. No.3 car scored its third win of the season, while No.24 car finished in 3rd position to score another podium finish. The GT-R Nismo GT3 scored another 1–2 finish in the following Okayama round, as the No.24 car took pole position, but finished the race in 7th position, despite making contact with another car during the race. No.5 car won its first race of the season, while No.3 car finished in 2nd position to score another podium. In the final round of the season, championship defending No.1 car scored its only win of the season, No.3 car scored a podium finish, as it finished the race in 3rd position, and also to win the 2015 Super Taikyu Series for drivers, Yukinori Taniguchi, Kyosuke Mineo and Yuya Motojima. Combined with all GT-R Nismo GT3s entered, the car have ended the season with 5 wins, 3 pole positions and 11 podium finishes.
2016 season was the most dominant season for the GT-R Nismo GT3, as it won every races of the season, and all three cars entered by the returned teams ended the season with a 1–2–3 finish in the final standings. The opening round at Motegi, saw a 1–2–3 finish for the GT-R Nismo GT3, as team Threebond Nissan Technical College Kondo Racing No.24 car won the race, GTNET No.5 car finished the race in 2nd position after taking pole position and the defending champions, in Endless Sports No.3 car took the 3rd place of the podium. A 1–2 finish was followed for the GT-R Nismo GT3 in the second round at Sugo, as No.24 car took pole position and won the race, while No.3 car finished the race in 2nd position to score another podium finish. In the third round at Suzuka, No.3 car won the race, while the No.24 car finished the race in 3rd after scoring its second consecutive pole position. Two consecutive 1–2 finishes were followed, as in the fourth round at Fuji, No.24 car scored its third win of the season, while No.3 car finished the race in 2nd position. In the fifth round at Okayama, No.24 won again after taking its third pole position of the season, while No.3 car finished in 2nd position. In the final round at Autopolis, it was another 1–2–3 finish for the GT-R Nismo GT3, No.3 car won the race, No.24 car took pole position and finished the race in 2nd position and No.5 car took 3rd place in the podium. No.24 GT-R Nismo GT3, driven by Yudai Uchida, Fuji and Kazuki Hiramine won the 2016 Super Taikyu Series. Combined with every GT-R Nismo GT3s entered, the car have ended the season with 6 consecutive wins, 5 pole positions and 15 podium finishes.
The teams returned for 2017 season, in the opening round at Motegi, it was a 1–2–3 finish for the GT-R Nismo GT3, championship defending Kondo Racing No.1 car won the race with the fastest lap of the race, Endless Sports No.3 car finished 2nd and GTNET No.99 car took 3rd place of the podium. Two consecutive 1–2 finishes followed for the car, in the second round at Motegi, No.24 car won and No.3 car finished in 2nd position again with the fastest lap. In third round at Suzuka, No.99 car won the race and No.3 car finished the race in 2nd position. In the fifth round at Fuji, No.1 car scored another podium finish, as it finished the race in 3rd position. In the final round at Okayama, No.3 car finished the race in 2nd position, while No.99 car finished in 3rd position to score a double-podium finish. Kondo Racing No.1 car ended up in 2nd position in the championship. The GT-R Nismo GT3 ended the season with 3 wins and 10 podium finishes.
For 2018 season, teams entered the championship with the upgraded GT-R Nismo GT3s. The car began the season with a 1–2 finish in the opening round at Suzuka, GTNET No.99 car won the race, Kondo Racing No.24 finished 2nd with the fastest lap of the race after starting from pole position. In the following round at Sugo, No.24 car scored another podium by finishing the race in 3rd position. In the third round at Fuji, No.3 car took pole position, No.99 car won the race. The car scored another 1–2 finish in fourth round at Autopolis, No.24 car won the race starting from pole position, No.99 car finished 2nd to score another podium finish. In Motegi, No.24 car took its second consecutive and third pole position of the season, while No.3 car won the race and No.99 car finished in 3rd to score another podium finish. It was another 1–2 finish for the GT-R Nismo GT3 in the final round at Okayama, as No.24 car won the race and No.99 scored its fourth consecutive podium finish of the season. GTNET No.99 car, driven by Teruhiko Hamano, Hoshino and Kiyoto Fujinami won the 2018 Super Taikyu Series, while Kondo Racing No.24 and Endless Sports No.3 car finished 2nd and 3rd positions in the final standings respectively. The GT-R Nismo GT3 ended the season with 5 wins, 3 pole positions and 10 podium finishes.
For 2019 season, the reigning champions returned to defend their title, while team Kondo Racing and Endless Sports was replaced with MP Racing and Tairoku Racing. In the opening round at Suzuka, reigning champions' No.1 car took pole position, despite making contact with another car, it finished the race in 6th position with the fastest lap of the race, while MP Racing No.9 car scored a podium finish, by finishing the race in 3rd position. In the following round at Sugo, No.1 car won the race starting from pole position. It was a 1–2–3 finish for the car at Fuji 24 Hour race, as No.1 car won the race, No.9 car finished 2nd and Tairoku Racing No.300 car finished in 3rd position with the fastest lap of the season, starting from pole position. No.1 car scored its third consecutive race win at the fourth round at Autopolis. The No.1 car did not enter the following round at Motegi, as it was revealed that points they have already scored were enough to win the 2019 Super Taikyu Series. No.9 car scored a podium finish, as it finished the race in 2nd position. No.1 car returned for the final round at Okayama, it finished the race in 3rd position. GT-R Nismo GT3 ended the season with 3 wins, 2 pole positions and 8 podium finishes.
Only two GT-R Nismo GT3s were competed in 2020 season, as Daishin GTNET and MP Racing were the only teams entered for the season. In the opening round at Fuji, GTNET No.81 car scored a podium finish, as it finished the race in 3rd position. In the following round at Sugo, MP Racing No.9 car finished the race in the 3rd place of the podium with the fastest lap of the race. 3 consecutive double-podium finishes continued for the GT-R Nismo GT3, as in the third and fourth rounds at Okayama and Motegi respectively, No.81 car finished 2nd and No.9 car finished those races in 3rd positions. In the final round at Autopolis, No.9 car finished 2nd, while No.81 car finished the race in 3rd position with the fastest lap. MP Racing was 2nd in the final standings. It was the first time that the GT-R Nismo GT3 did not win a race in a Super Taikyu Series since its debut in 2012. The car have ended the season with only 8 podium finishes.
Both teams returned for the 2021 season, but did not compete in championship contention, as both teams did not enter for every race of the season. In the Fuji 24 Hour race, GTNET No.81 car won the race. In the following fourth round at Autopolis, MP Racing No.9 car finished in 2nd position to scored a podium finish. In the final round at Okayama, No.81 scored another podium finish, as it finished the race in 2nd position. Team Daishin GTNET was 4th in final standings. The GT-R Nismo GT3 ended the season with a win and 3 podium finishes.
For the current 2022 season, both teams returned, additionally Helm Motorsports entered with a GT-R Nismo GT3. In the opening round at Suzuka, GTNET No.81 car won the race. In the following Fuji 24 Hour race, Helm Motorsports' No.62 car won the race, while No.81 car finished in 3rd position to score another podium finish. In the fourth round at Autopolis, No.62 car scored its second win of the season. In the fifth round at Motegi, No.81 car scored another podium finish, as it finished the race in 2nd position. Helm Motorsports currently 2nd position in championship standings with only two races to go, just 0.5 points behind the leading Mercedes AMG GT3.
Other major achievements
The Bathurst 12 Hour was one of the most successful endurance races for the GT-R Nismo GT3, as where its predecessor, Nissan Skyline GT-R R32 Group A also have earned its nickname "Godzilla", despite the standard GT-R made its debut in 2012, entered by team Donut King Racing and driven by Tony Alfred, Adam Breechey and Peter Leemhuis, it won the C class and finished the race 6th in overall positions. The GT-R Nismo GT3 made its Bathurst 12 Hour debut in 2014, entered by Nismo Athlete Global Team, it qualified in 5th position for the race. In the race, while battling for 3rd position, the car involved in an incident and retired from the race. The team returned for the 2015 race, with drivers Florian Strauss, Katsumasa Chiyo and Wolfgang Reip, the car crashed while on a flying for pole position, but managed to qualify in 3rd position. In the race after an intensive battle up front in the final 20 minutes of the race, the car charged itself from 3rd to 1st on the penultimate lap and won the 2015 Liquid Moly Bathurst 12 Hour. It was the first time won by a Nissan entered car since the 1992 race, as the Skyline GT-R R32 Group N won the race for the last time before it was banned. In the 2016 race, where after qualifying in a disappointing 13th position, Chiyo, Strauss and Nissan Australia's Rick Kelly finished the race in 2nd position, just 1.2 seconds behind the race-winning McLaren 650S GT3 from Tekno Autosports, however the car led the most laps in the race, having led for 107 out of the 297 laps run. The team did not returned for the 2017 race, instead Nissan Motorsport and Wall Racing entered the race each with two GT-R Nismo GT3s. Nissan Motorsport's No.24 car led the race in different scenarios, despite having a gearbox issue in the 6th hour of the race, the car pitted and rejoined the race in 10th position, but managed to finish the race 4th in class and 8th overall. No.23 car retired from the race due to technical errors, despite the car have competes 174 laps,  it was classified as it finished the race 8th in class and 32nd in overall positions. Both Wall Racing entered cars were retired from the race, but No.38 car was classified as it finished the race in 31st position, despite having completed 200 laps. The car did not enter for the race in 2018. In 2019 KCMG entered the race with two GT-R Nismo GT3s, as a part of the 2019 Intercontinental GT Challenge. No.18 car finished the race in 7th position, while No.35 car finished 10th in class and 15th in overall positions. The team returned for the 2020 race, where No.18 car qualified in 4th position, while No.35 car withdrew the race due to a crash during the practice session. No.18 car finished the race 9th in class and 12th in overall positions. A GT-R Nismo GT3 entered by Hobson Motorsport, qualified 6th and 31st, finished the race 5th and 21st in class and overall positions respectively. Since then no GT-R Nismo GT3s were entered for the race.
The GT-R Nismo GT3 also have competed in the Dubai 24 Hour race, making its debut in 2012, the car finished the race in 22nd position in A6 class. The car did not enter the race in 2013 and 2014, but in 2015, car No.23 entered by Nissan GT Academy Team RJN with GT Academy drivers, Florian Strauss, Ricardo Sanchez, Ahmed Bin Khanen, Nick Hammann and Gaetan Paletou, qualified on pole position in Pro-Am class and 14th in overall positions. Even though it received couple of drive through penalties, the car managed to score a podium finish, as it finished the race 2nd in Pro-Am class and 5th in overall positions. In 2016, a customer team, MRS GT-Racing entered a GT-R Nismo GT3 in Pro class, the car finished the race in 11th in Pro class and 23rd in overall positions, starting from 10th on the grid in Pro class. No GT-R Nismo GT3s were entered for the 2017 and 2018 races, but in 2019, KCMG entered the race with two cars, No.35 car qualified 10th and No.23 car qualified 12th in Pro class, No.35 car managed to finish the race 8th in Pro class and 29th in overall positions, but No.23 car retired from the race, as it involved in an incident during the race. Since then no GT-R Nismo GT3s were entered the race.
Following the GT-R Club Track Edition's participation in SP8T class for couple of years, the GT-R Nismo GT3 made its Nürburgring 24 Hours debut in 2013, entered by team Schulze Motorsport, the car qualified 26th in overall positions. During the race, despite having some technical issues, the team had to replace its engine, and the car managed to finish the race in 134th position overall. The team returned for the 2014 race, where they finished 11th in SP9 GT3 class and 14th in overall positions. Nissan GT Academy Team RJN also entered the race with two cars, No.80 car finished the race 13th in SP9 class and 24th in overall positions. No.30 car retired from the race, despite making contact with a barrier during the race. Both teams returned for the 2015 race, but team GT Academy entered only with the No.35 car, which qualified in 31st position, missing out the top 30 pole position, despite receiving a penalty. In the race, driven by Lucas Ordóñez, Michael Krumm, Alex Buncombe and Kazuki Hoshino, the car charged itself to finish the race in 9th position in class and overall. Schulze Motorsport's GT-R Nismo GT3 was just behind the No.35 car until the last hour of the race, where the car had a gearbox issue and forced to retire from the race. Nissan GT Academy Team RJN returned for the 2016 race, the car qualified in 25th position and climbed up positions to finish the race in 11th position overall. A customer team, Team Zakspeed also have entered the race with a GT-R Nismo GT3, but retired from the race due to an incident. The car did not enter for the 2017 and 2018 races. In 2019, Kondo Racing entered the race with a GT-R Nismo GT3, as driven by Tom Coronel, Tomonobu Fuji, Tsugio Matsuda and Mitsunori Takaboshi, it qualified in 25th position overall, and finished the race 8th in SP9 class and 9th in overall positions. KCMG also have entered for the race with two GT-R Nismo GT3s, both cars retired from the race, due to incidents and technical errors. It was the last time that a GT-R Nismo GT3 was entered for a Nürburgring 24 Hours race.
Other categories
A production-based GT-R made its world motorsport debut in Australia's Targa Tasmania tarmac rally in April 2008, however it sustained damage early in the event and did not complete the rally. Later in 2008 a GT-R won the Competition Modern class in the Targa West before returning to Targa Tasmania in 2009 to take the outright win in the Modern class. In 2009 Nissan's GT-R won the One Lap of America competition. In 2010 the GT-R finished 2nd over all in the One Lap of America competition. During the 2010 SCCA World Challenge season, a pair of GT class GT-Rs were campaigned by Brass Monkey Racing and driven by Steve Ott and Tony Rivera.
On June 4, 2010, Nismo introduced a Club Track Edition GT-R available via its Nissan supported Omori aftermarket factory. This domestic market trim is a non-street legal, race-ready variant equipped with a 6-point roll cage and upgraded with the Nismo race package developed through its Tokachi endurance racer program. On June 25 and 26, 2011, the No. 71 Schulze Motorsport Nissan GT-R took part in the 24 Hours of Nürburgring 2011 driven by Michael Schulze, Tobias Schulze, Kazunori Yamauchi and Yasuyoshi Yamamoto. The car finished the race in 36th place overall, achieving a victory in the SP 8T class after overcoming several technical problems. It was the first time a Nissan GT-R took part in the 24 Hours of Nürburgring. In 2013, Nissan participated the SP8T class with 2 Club Track Edition GT-Rs as a works team, which driven by Team Nissan and Team GT Academy, both cars completed a 1–2 finish in its class and 30th and 99th in overall driven by Lucas Ordonez, Kazunori Yamauchi, Yasukichi Yamamoto and Tobias Schulze and Michael Krumm, Toshio Suzuki, Kazuki Hoshino, Tetsuya Tanaka respectively.
Tuning
Despite early concerns about the difficulty of modifying the Nissan GT-R, many aftermarket tuning parts have become available. The previously reported "untunable" ECU has since been hacked by several tuning houses. COBB Tuning was the first company to access the GT-R's encrypted ECU. Mine's also has limited control of the ECU, and others (MCR, HKS, and Top Secret) have bypassed the unit. They have been seen testing modified GT-Rs with the former two having conducted tests at the Tsukuba Circuit.
Ecutek tuning, on the other hand, was the first company to manipulate and change shift points on the GT-R in the TCM (Transmission Control Module) in automatic mode. This can be done at will by the driver. Ecutek also allows the driver to adjust launch control on the fly available with a wrap-around boost gauge that can read over 20 PSI. Like COBB Tuning, Ecutek offered engine tuning on the ECU and TCM with different launch control software from LC1 up to LC5. On January 16, 2013, Ecutek also became the first company to construct and offer Flex Fuel hardware and software capability for all GT-R models. This fuel kit requires the Ecutek specific TCM. The kit provides changes in the cold start cranking compensation, changes to the maximum target boost, changes in the ignition timing, changes to target airflow, changes in cam timing, and changes in the fuel economy gauge reading all based solely on ethanol content in the gas tank.
Japan based tuner Mine's has created the VR38DETT super response engine which uses lightened engine internals like titanium rods, lightened pistons and many other components that allow the engine to rev more quickly, it makes 588 kW; 789 hp; 800 PS. AMS Performance, Alpha Logic Performance, and Extreme Turbo Systems were the major turner companies for building drag cars and aftermarket tuner parts for the GT-R.
In a review by Motor Trend editor Scott Kanemura, it was revealed that the GPS system fitted to the GT-R would remove the 180 km/h (112 mph) speed limiter when the car arrives at a race track, but only on tracks approved by Nissan. Aftermarket ECUs have been developed to bypass the speed limiter, in addition to stand-alone speed-limiter defeaters. The GPS check will not be implemented in American models. In August 2008, Nissan's official motorsport and tuning arm Nismo introduced the "Club Sport" tuning package for the GT-R. The package, which is also fitted to the SpecV, includes Bilstein Damptronic compatible dampers, 20" forged aluminium wheels from RAYS Engineering, Bridgestone run-flat tyres, Recaro carbon fibre-shelled bucket seats, a titanium exhaust, and a revised rear diffuser with an added cooling duct. The package is supported by a warranty and saves over 20 kg (44 lb).
Drag Racing
AMS Performance, based in West Chicago, Illinois, has set record power levels and performance numbers for the GT-R. Their Alpha Omega GT-R as well as the first GT-R to reach the 9's, 8's, 7's and 6's. In June 2013, Omega broke into the 7s when it ran a 7.98 at 299.56 km/h (186.14 mph). During the evening of the 7-second pass, Omega broke a couple of other records. Omega bested its previous 97–209 km/h (60–130 mph) time with 2.67 seconds. Omega also broke the 161–241 km/h (100–150 mph) record which was previously held by an Underground Racing TT Gallardo (2.58 seconds) with 2.45 seconds. But in June 2015, the Alpha Omega GT-R was generating over 2050 horsepower and boasts 0–60 mph time of 1.49 seconds. Omega set multiple world records at the WannaGoFast 1/2 Mile Shootout at Built Field Airport in Monee, Illinois which included: 361.8 km/h (224.91 mph) in a standing 1/2 mile; 97–209 km/h (60–130 mph) time in 2.28 seconds; 0–161 km/h (0–100 mph) in 2.78 seconds; 0–300 km/h (0–186 mph) in 7.07 seconds; 0–322 km/h (0–200 mph) in 10.49 seconds. the Alpha Omega GT-R did its best quarter-mile time in 7.49 seconds at 310 km/h (193 mph). making it the quickest and fastest GT-R and road-legal vehicle in the world. and the car won the King Of The Streets competition two times in a row. The AMS Performance Alpha Omega package functions more as a shop/research and development vehicle which is the reason why it is not available to the general public. However, anybody can purchase the Alpha 6, Alpha 9, Alpha 10, Alpha 12, Alpha 14, Alpha 16, and Alpha X packages; each respectively with approximately 447 kW; 600 hp; 608 PS, 669 kW; 898 hp; 910 PS, 746 kW; 1,000 hp; 1,014 PS, 895 kW; 1,200 hp; 1,217 PS, 1,044 kW; 1,400 hp; 1,419 PS, 1,193 kW; 1,600 hp; 1,622 PS, 1,641 kW; 2,200 hp; 2,231 PS when installed and tuned.
In 2017, AMS Performance built Alpha-G GT-R became the first GT-R to run a quarter-mile in 6 seconds. The car completed the run in 6.937 seconds driven by Gidi Chamdi with a trap speed of 315.36 km/h (196 mph) and held the fastest all-wheel-drive record. Later, ETS (Extreme Turbo Systems) GT-R broke the record with a 6.88 seconds of a quarter-mile run at 358.80 km/h (223 mph), also set the record for fastest standing half-mile with a trap speed of 410.29 km/h (255 mph). In December 2018, the Alpha Logic Performance from Dubai set the quarter-mile record for fastest GT-R and fastest all-wheel-drive using their "Panda" GT-R in 6.582 seconds at 373.82 km/h (232.28 mph). In 2019 Import vs Domestic finals, the 2,610 kW; 3,500 hp; 3,549 PS and 100 PSI of boost ETS-G GT-R broke the quickest and fastest GT-R, all-wheel-drive and stock unibody world record, as it completed a 1/4 mile run in 6.56 seconds at trap speed of 362.02 km/h (225 mph), winning the competition by beating the AMS Performance's Alpha Queen GT-R, which is completed a 6.87 second quarter mile run.
At the Dragtimes Competition in Russia, the AMS Alpha 12 GT-R broke the fastest road-legal standing 1 mile record, driven by Jury with a trap speed of 382 km/h (237 mph), later the record was broken by a 1,864 kW; 2,500 hp; 2,535 PS Ford GT. Later in the same competition, Switzer Goliath GT-R broke the quickest road-legal standing 1 mile record in 22.602 seconds at a trap speed of 402 km/h (250 mph).
Time Attack
Modified GT-Rs have competed in several time attack challenges, especially in WTAC (World Time Attack Challenge). Time attack GT-Rs have been fielded by HKS, Precision Automotive Racing and LYFE. In 2015, the HKS GT-R became the fastest time attack GT-R, which had the same VR38DETT engine with generating over 895 kW; 1,200 hp; 1,217 PS. It was became the fastest vehicle at Fontana, California, Fuji Speedway (achieving a peak speed of over 322 km/h (200 mph) in the main start/finish straight) and in Sydney Motorsport Park. The car competed at 2015 WTAC and won the GT-R R35 class with the fastest lap time of 1:30.838 minutes. But in 2017, LYFE's 847 kW; 1,136 hp; 1,152 PS GT-R broke all HKS's records and won the title for the fastest time attack GT-R in the WTAC. In 2017 WTAC, Precision Automotive Racing's GT-R, driven by Aaron McGranahan, set a peak speed of 269 km/h (167 mph) and won the Flying 500 class title.
Hill Climb
The GT-R have competed in both stock and modified forms in many hill climbing competitions, notably in the Jaguar Simola Hill Climb in South Africa. In 2019 Jaguar Simola Hill Climb, the GT-R was named the most successful supercar, as it won the final Top 10 Shootout event, with Kyle Mitchell driving, setting a time of 40.862 seconds and becoming the fastest road-legal vehicle.
Drifting
In February 2016, using a modified 2016 model year GT-R, Masato Kawabata set a new world record for the fastest 30-degree drift at approximately 304 km/h at the Fujairah International Airport.
Others
On August 13, 2014, Mike Newman set a Guinness world record for the "Fastest speed for a car driven blindfolded" in a GT-R modified by Litchfield Motors (UK).
References
Further reading