Non-reproductive sexual behavior in animals
Non-reproductive sexual behavior consists of sexual activities animals participate in that do not lead to the reproduction of the species. Although procreation continues to be the primary explanation for sexual behavior in animals, recent observations on animal behavior have given alternative reasons for the engagement in sexual activities by animals. Animals have been observed to engage in sex for social interaction bonding, exchange for significant materials, affection, mentorship pairings, sexual enjoyment, or as demonstration of social rank. Observed non-procreative sexual activities include non-copulatory mounting (without insertion, or by a female, or by a younger male who does not yet produce semen), oral sex, genital stimulation, anal stimulation, interspecies mating, and acts of affection, although it is doubted that they have done this since the beginning of their existence. There have also been observations of sex with cub participants, same-sex sexual interaction, as well as sex with dead animals.
Social interaction and bonding
Lions are known to engage in sex to create bonds and interact with each other. Lions live in a social group known as a pride that consists of 2–18 females and 1–7 males. The females found in these prides were born into the pride. The males enter the pride from other prides. The success of reproduction for each individual lion is dependent on the number of male lions found in their social group. Male lions create coalitions and search for prides to take over. Successful coalitions have usually created a strong bond with each other and will take over prides. Once winning in a competition, all current males in the pride will be kicked out and left to find another pride. While in search for another pride these males will often engage in sexual behavior with each other; creating a strong bond in this new coalition created.
Sex plays a fundamental role in the social lives of bonobos. Female bonobos have been observed to engage in sexual activities to create bonds with dominant bonobos. Having created this bond with the male, they will share food with each other and not compete with each other. All members of a bonobo group are potential sex partners, regardless of age combination or gender combination. In "Biological Exuberance," Bagemihl writes: "when new females (usually adolescents) join a troop, they often pair up with an older female with whom they have most of their sexual and affectionate interactions." In addition, bonobos need not limit themselves to a single partner: "These bond need not be exclusive – either party may have sex with other females or males – but such mentorlike pairings can last for a year or more until the newcomer is fully integrated into the troop." Pairings between younger and older male bonobos are also common: "typically an adolescent male spreads his legs and presents his erect penis to an adult male, who takes the shaft in his hand and caresses it with up-and-down movements."
Social pairings between youth and adult bonobos happen across gender combinations:
"Both adult males and females interact sexually with adolescents and juveniles (three-to-nine-year-olds). In fact, young females go through a five-to-six-year period sometimes referred to as adolescent sterility (although no pathology is involved) during which they actively participate in heterosexual mating (often with adults) but never get pregnant. Sexual behavior between adults and infants of both sexes is common - about a third of the time it is initiated by the infant and may involve genital rubbing and full copulatory postures (including penetration of an adult female by a male infant)."
Social conflict remediation
Several species utilize sexual activity as a way to resolve disagreement. Bonobos are one species famously known for using sexual behavior as a means of resolution of social conflict.
In a study concentrated on primate conflict resolution, researchers wanted to observe primates in conflict. How primates coped and resolved conflicts was a main concern in this study. Researchers stated that after primates participated in a heated, physical fight; both primates involved in the fight would hug and have a mouth-to-mouth kiss. This action was considered as a demonstration of affection and reconciliation.
Proximate causes
Awareness in species is difficult to determine. Learned behaviors that have been demonstrated in laboratories have provided good evidence that animals have instinct and a reward system. The behavior of laboratory animals demonstrates a mental experience wherein the animal's instincts tell it if it carries out a certain action, it will then receive what it needs. For example, the lab rat will push the lever because it knows food will fall out of the hole in the wall. It does not need awareness, but it does seem to work on a reward system. The lab rat learned the action needed to be fed.
Studies of the brain have proven that pleasure and displeasure are an important component in the lives of animals. It has been established that the limbic neural mechanism that generates reactions are very similar across all mammals. Many studies have concentrated on the brain reward system and how similar it is across mammals. Through extensive research, scientists have been able to conclude that the brain reward system in animals is extremely similar to that of humans. The mechanism of core pleasure reaction is significantly important for animals and humans.
Case study
In a case study, female Japanese macaques were studied to find evidence of possible female copulatory orgasms. The frequency of orgasms did not correlate with the age or rank of the Japanese macaques. Researchers observed that the longer and higher number of pelvic thrusts, the longer copulation lasted. There was an orgasmic response in 80 of the 240 Japanese macaques studied.
Reward system
Evolutionary principles have predicted that the reward system is part of the proximate mechanism underlying the behavior. Because animals possess a brain reward system they are motivated to perform in different ways by desire and reinforced by pleasure. Animals establish security of food, shelter, social contact, and mating because proximate mechanism, if they do not seek these necessities they will not survive.
All vertebrates share similarities in body structure; they all have a skeleton, a nervous system, a circulatory system, a digestive system and excretory system. Similar to humans, non-human animals also have a sensory system. The sensory system is responsible for the basic five senses from touch to tasting. Most of the physiological and biochemical responses found in animals are found in humans. Neurophysiologists have not found any fundamental difference between the structure and function of neurons and synapse between humans and other animals.
Case study
Recent studies using positron emission tomography (PET) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) has provided evidence proving that chemical changes that occur with emotions are similar between humans and non-human animals. In a study comparing guinea pigs and humans, it was determined that the distress experienced by offspring separation in a guinea pig and a human going through depression activates the same region of the brain. The opiate receptor was also examined, allowing observation of the pleasure stimuli. In the procedure both a human and a rat had their receptors blocked with a certain drug. Once receptors were blocked, both the rat and the human were exposed to pleasurable food, but both were disinclined to eat the food.
Types of behavior
Engagements of sexual activities during non-breeding seasons have been observed in the animal kingdom. Dolphins and Japanese macaques are two of the many species that engage in sexual activities that do not lead to fertilization. Great varieties of non-copulatory mounting are expressed in several species. Male lions engage in mounting with other male lions, especially when in search for another pride. The varieties of mounting include mounting without erections, mounting with erection but no insertion, and mounting from the side.
Expressions of affection are displayed in the animal kingdom as well. Affectionate behaviors do not include insertion or genital rubbing, but are still seen as a manner of sexual behavior. An affectionate activity can be as simple as licking. Male lions are known for head rubbing, bats engage in licking, and mountain sheep rub horns and faces with each other. Kissing, touching of noses, mouths and muzzles have been witnessed in African elephants, walruses, and mountain zebras. Primates also engage in kissing that is incredibly similar to human display of kissing. Chimpanzees have full mouth-to-mouth contact, and bonobos kiss with their mouth open and mutual tongue stimulation. There are a variety of acts to show affection such as African elephants intertwining their trunks, giraffes engaging in “necking”, and Hanuman langurs cuddling with each other in a front to back sitting position.
Non-penetrative genital stimulation is very common throughout the animal kingdom. Different forms of self and partner genital stimulation have been observed in the animal kingdom. Oral sex has been observed throughout the animal kingdom, from dolphins to primates. Bonobos have been observed to transition from a simple demonstration of affection to non-penetrative genital stimulation. Animals perform oral sex by licking, sucking or nuzzling the genitals of their partner. Another form of genital stimulation is masturbation. Masturbation is widespread throughout mammals for both males and females. It is less common in birds. There are several techniques, in which animals engage in masturbation from using paws, feet, flippers, tails, and sometimes using objects like sticks, pebbles, and leaves. Masturbation occurs more often in primate species with large testes relative to their body size.
Anal insertion
Anal insertion with the penis (both in heterosexual and male homosexual dyads, i.e. pairs of animals) has been observed among some primate species. Male homosexual anal insertion has been recorded in Old World primate species, including gorillas, orangutans, and some members of the Macaca genus (namely, stumptail, rhesus, and Japanese macaques). It has also been recorded in at least two New World primate species, the squirrel monkey and the spider monkey. Morris (1970) also described one heterosexual orangutan dyad where all insertion was anal. However, the practice might have been a consequence of homosexual rearing, as the male orangutan in this dyad had had extensive same–sex experience.
A case of male homosexual anal insertion with the finger has also been reported among orangutans, and Bruce Bagemihl mentions it as one of the homosexual practices recorded at least once among male chimpanzees.
Autoeroticism or masturbation
It appears that many animals, both male and female, masturbate, both when partners are available and otherwise. For example, it has been observed in cats, dogs, male Cape ground squirrels, male deer, rhinoceroses, boars, male monkeys  and otters.
A review from the University of Pennsylvania School of Veterinary Medicine says:
Castration does not prevent masturbation, as it is observed in geldings. Masturbation is common in both mares and stallions, before and after puberty.
Sexologist Havelock Ellis in his 1927 Studies in the Psychology of Sex identified bulls, goats, sheep, camels and elephants as species known to practice autoeroticism, adding of some other species:
In his 1999 book, Biological exuberance, Bruce Bagemihl documents that:
and that:
David Linden, professor of neuroscience at Johns Hopkins University, remarks that:
Among elephants, female same-sex behaviours have been documented only in captivity where they are known to masturbate one another with their trunks.
Oral sex
Animals of several species are documented as engaging in both autofellatio and oral sex. Although easily confused by laypeople, autofellatio and oral sex are separate, sexually oriented behaviors, distinct from non-sexual grooming or the investigation of scents.
Auto-fellatio or oral sex in animals is documented in spiders (Darwin's bark and widow), brown bears, stump-tailed macaques, Tibetan macaques, wolves, goats, primates,  bats, cape ground squirrels and sheep (see section Masturbation for details).
In the greater short-nosed fruit bat, copulation by males is dorsoventral and the females lick the shaft or the base of the male's penis, but not the glans, which has already penetrated the vagina. While the females do this, the penis is not withdrawn and research has shown a positive relationship between length of the time that the penis is licked and the duration of copulation. Post copulation genital grooming has also been observed.
Homosexual behaviour
The presence of same-sex sexual behaviour was not scientifically reported on a large scale until recent times. Homosexual behaviour does occur in the animal kingdom outside humans, especially in social species, particularly in marine birds and mammals, monkeys, and the great apes. As of 1999, the scientific literature contained reports of homosexual behavior in at least 471 wild species.
Homosexual behavior exists on a spectrum, and may or may not involve insertion. Apart from sexual activity, it can refer to homosexual pair-bonding, homosexual parenting and homosexual acts of affection. Engaging in homosexual behavior may allow species to obtain benefits such as gaining practice, relieving tension, and experiencing pleasure. Georgetown University professor Janet Mann has specifically theorised that homosexual behaviour, at least in dolphins, is an evolutionary advantage that minimizes intraspecies aggression, especially among males.
After studying bonobos for his book Bonobo: The Forgotten Ape, primatologist Frans de Waal, a professor of psychology at Emory University in Atlanta, says that such expressions of intimacy are consistent with the homosexual behaviour of what he terms "the erotic champions of the world". "Same-sex, opposite-sex — bonobos just love sex play," de Waal said in an interview. "They have so much sex, it gets boring."
Homosexual behaviour is found in 6–10% of rams (sheep) and associated with variations in cerebral mass distribution and chemical activity.
Male bighorn sheep are divisible into two kinds: the typical males among whom homosexual behaviour, including intercourse, is common and "effeminate sheep", or "behavioural transvestites", which are not known to engage in homosexual behaviour.
Male-male copulation has been observed in captive penguins and homosexual behaviour has been observed among bats, in particular, the fruit bat.
Homosexual pair-bonding and parenting
Homosexual pair-bonding can be established several ways; two of the main ways are pair bonding as partners or as companions. As partners, both animals will engage in sexual activities with each other. In companion bonding, sexual engagement is not necessary in the relationship. This form of homosexuality is more of a partnership and friendship; they spend all their time together. More than 70 species of birds engage in one of these two bonding.
Homosexual parenting (sometimes referred to as cooperative breeding) occurs in a wide variety of species in the animal kingdom. Homosexual parenting can occur in different ways, one of the most common being two females (typically related) coming together to help one another raise their offspring. An example of this is in meadow vole populations. Summer is peak breeding season for meadow voles; however, going into winter and spring there is a division between the male and female meadow vole populations. They prefer communal nesting (because of the thermoregulatory benefits), and therefore, in the winter and spring female meadow voles will commonly not only nest with another female, but nurse their offspring together as well. This kind of communal nursing, and same-sex social bonds, among meadow voles is actually thought to benefit the young — increasing growth and survival rates.
Homosexual parenting is especially present among certain species of birds, one of the most famous examples being Laysan albatross. It is fairly uncommon among different species for unrelated individuals of the same sex to raise offspring together, but female-female pairings in Laysan albatross populations are one of the exceptions. This same-sex pairing and mutual cooperation in chick-rearing often occurs in the Laysan albatross populations which have uneven sex ratios (and an overall greater surplus of females). Also, Laysan albatross are known for being monogamous, and this tendency actually allows same-sex parenting to persist.
Genital-genital rubbing
Genital-genital rubbing, or GG rubbing, among non-human animals is sexual activity in which one animal rubs his or her genitals against the genitals of another animal. The term GG rubbing is frequently used by primatologists to describe this type of sexual intimacy among female bonobos, and is stated to be the "bonobo's most typical sexual pattern, undocumented in any other primate". The term is sometimes used in reference to GG rubbing among male bonobos, under the term "penis fencing", which is the non-human form of frot that human males engage in. Such rubbing between males is thought, according to varying evolutionary theorists, to have existed before the development of hominids into humans and bonobos, and may or may not have occurred in the homosexual activity of both of these genetically related species.
Genital rubbing has been observed once among male orangutans and several times in a small group of lar gibbons, where two males thrust their genitals together, sometimes resulting in ejaculation in one of the partners. It has been observed among bull manatees, in conjunction with "kissing", and is also common among homosexually active mammals.
Inter-species sex
Some animals opportunistically mate with individuals of another species. This is more commonly observed in domesticated species and animals in captivity, possibly because captivity is associated with a decrease in aggression and an increase in sexual receptivity. Nevertheless, animals in the wild have been observed to attempt sexual activity with other species. It is mostly documented among species that belong to the same genus, but sometimes occurs between species of distant taxa. Alfred Kinsey cites reports of sexual activity involving a female eland with an ostrich, a male dog with a chicken, a male monkey with a snake, and a female chimpanzee with a cat.
A 2008 review of the literature found 44 species pairs that had been observed attempting interspecies mating, and 46 species pairs that had completed interspecies matings, not counting cases that had resulted in hybridization. Most were known from laboratory experiments, but field observations had also been made. It may result in fitness loss because of the waste of time, energy, and nutrients.
Male sea otters have been observed forcibly copulating with seals, and male seals have been observed forcibly copulating with penguins. Inter-species sexual behavior has also been observed in sea lions. Male grasshoppers of the species Tetrix ceperoi often mount other species of either sex and even flies, but are normally repelled by the larger females. Males of the spider mite species Panonychus citri copulate with female Panonychus mori mites almost as often as with their own species, even though it does not result in reproduction.
The Japanese macaque has been observed attempting to mate with the sika deer.
Sex involving juveniles
Male stoats (Mustela erminea) will sometimes mate with infant females of their species. This is a natural part of their reproductive biology – they have a delayed gestation period, so these females give birth the following year when they are fully grown.
In one reported observation, a male spotted hyena attempted to mate with a female hyena, but she succeeded in driving him off. He eventually turned to her ten-month-old cub, repeatedly mounting and ejaculating on it. The cub sometimes ignored this and sometimes struggled "slightly as if in play". The mother did not intervene.
It appears to be common in the Adélie penguin.
Among insects, there have been reports of immature females being forcibly copulated with.
Juvenile male chimpanzees have been recorded mounting and copulating with immature chimps. Infants in bonobo societies are often involved in sexual behaviour.  Immature male bonobos have been recorded initiating genital play with both adolescent and mature female bonobos. Copulation-like contact between immature bonobo males and mature female bonobos increases with age and continues until the male bonobo has reached juvenile age. In contrast, adult gorillas do not show any sexual interest in juvenile or infant members of their species. Primates regularly have sex in full view of infants, juveniles and younger members of their species.
Necrophilia
Necrophilia describes when an animal engages in a sexual act with a dead animal. It has been observed in mammals, birds, reptiles and frogs.  It sometimes occurs in the Adélie penguin.  Homosexual necrophilia has been reported between two male mallard ducks.  One duck was believed to be pursuing another duck with the goal of rape (a common aspect of duck sexual behaviour) when the second duck collided with a window and died immediately. The observer, Kees Moeliker, suggested that "when one died the other one just went for it and didn't get any negative feedback—well, didn't get any feedback."  The case study earned Moeliker an Ig Nobel Prize in biology, awarded for research that cannot or should not be reproduced.