NYU Langone Health
NYU Langone Health is an academic medical center located in New York City, New York, United States. The health system consists of NYU Grossman School of Medicine and NYU Long Island School of Medicine, both part of New York University (NYU), and more than 300 locations throughout the New York metropolitan area, including six inpatient facilities: Tisch Hospital, Kimmel Pavilion, NYU Langone Orthopedic Hospital, Hassenfeld Children's Hospital, NYU Langone Hospital – Brooklyn and NYU Langone Hospital – Long Island.  It is also home to Rusk Rehabilitation Institute.
NYU Langone Health is ranked number 3 in the nation and number 1 in New York State on U.S. News & World Report’s 2022–23 “Best Hospitals Honor Roll”. NYU Grossman School of Medicine is ranked number 2 in the nation on U.S. News & World Report’s 2022–23 list of “Best Graduate Schools for Research”, rising from number 34 in 2010. Rusk Rehabilitation is consistently ranked one of the top 10 rehabilitation programs in the country by U.S. News & World Report. Vizient, Inc. and the Leapfrog Group, two independent healthcare performance improvement organizations, have named NYU Langone Health among the top health systems nationwide for quality and safety, and the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services has awarded the institution a five-star rating. NYU Langone Health’s four hospitals have all earned the Magnet designation for excellence in nursing and quality patient care from the American Nurses Credentialing Center, an honor achieved by only 9.4% of hospitals in the U.S.  NYU Langone Health is one of the largest healthcare systems in the Northeast, with more than 46,000 employees.
History
The hospital was originally named NYU Medical Center and was changed to NYU Langone Medical Center in 2008 after a $200 million gift from Kenneth and Elaine Langone. Kenneth Langone is the chairman of the board of trustees. In November 2008, a $150 million donation was given for the construction of the Helen L. and Martin S. Kimmel Pavilion in honor of the late real estate developer and philanthropist Martin Kimmel. The hospital officially changed its name to NYU Langone Health in 2017.
With a tradition of responding to urgent public health issues, the faculty and alumni of NYU Grossman School of Medicine have contributed to the control of tuberculosis, diphtheria, yellow fever, and sexually transmitted infections, the development of vaccines for hepatitis B, polio, and cancer, advances in the treatment and prevention of stroke and heart disease, the introduction of minimally invasive surgical techniques, and others. In the early 1980s, clinicians and researchers at NYU Grossman School of Medicine, including dermatologists, infectious disease specialists, immunologists, oncologists, and epidemiologists, were among the first to identify an alarming increase in Kaposi's sarcoma, opportunistic infections, and immune system failure among young gay men, and alert health authorities to an imminent health catastrophe, soon to be known as HIV/AIDS.
Facilities
NYU Grossman School of Medicine


Founded in 1841, NYU Grossman School of Medicine includes the Joan and Joel Smilow Research Center, devoted to translational medicine; the Vilcek Institute of Graduate Biomedical Sciences, which offers interdisciplinary training programs in the basic medical sciences, leading to a PhD; and the NYU Post-Graduate Medical School, offering continuing medical education courses to physicians and other biomedical health professionals.
NYU Grossman School of Medicine maintains affiliations with several leading area hospitals, including NYC Health + Hospitals, Bellevue, the nation's oldest public hospital, which serves as its primary teaching affiliate, the VA New York Harbor Healthcare System's–Manhattan campus, NYC Health + Hospitals Gouverneur in Manhattan, and NYC Health + Hospitals/Woodhull in Brooklyn.
Tisch Hospital
Tisch Hospital is a 300-bed inpatient hospital that has 66 operating rooms, a clinical care unit and a neonatal intensive care unit. Tisch Hospital is also home to the Joint Commission-accredited Comprehensive Stroke Center and the Ronald O. Perelman Center for Emergency Services. The present facility opened in 1963 as University Hospital and was renamed Tisch Hospital in 1989 after the families of Laurence Tisch and Preston Robert Tisch gave a $30 million donation to New York University and its medical center.
Kimmel Pavilion
The Helen L. and Martin S. Kimmel Pavilion is a 374-bed hospital composed of single rooms. It also contains 30 operating rooms and image-guided labs, and 4 procedural rooms. It opened in June 2018.
Hassenfeld Children's Hospital
Hassenfeld Children's Hospital (HCH) at NYU Langone (formerly Children's Health at NYU Hospitals Center) is a pediatric acute care children's hospital located on the NYU Langone campus in Manhattan, New York. Hassenfeld Children's Hospital has 102 pediatric beds and is located in the Helen L. and Martin S. Kimmel Pavilion. It is directly affiliated with the pediatrics department of the New York University Grossman School of Medicine. The hospital treats infants, children, teens, and young adults aged 0–21, with some programs treating up until age 25. While not a trauma center, Hassenfeld Children's Hospital contains the KiDS Emergency Department to treat children with injuries.
NYU Langone Orthopedic Hospital
NYU Langone Orthopedic Hospital, formerly known as Hospital for Joint Diseases, provides medical and surgical care for the prevention, treatment, and rehabilitation of orthopedic, musculoskeletal, rheumatic, and neurological conditions, as well as other related diseases and injuries.
NYU Langone Hospital – Brooklyn
NYU Langone Hospital – Brooklyn is a full-service, 450-bed academic teaching hospital in the Sunset Park neighborhood of Brooklyn, New York City. Formerly named NYU Lutheran Medical Center, it functions as the hub of Lutheran Healthcare, which itself is part of the larger NYU Langone Health.
NYU Langone Hospital – Long Island
NYU Langone Hospital — Long Island is a hospital in Mineola, New York that is the Long Island hospital base of NYU Langone Health System. It was previously known as Nassau Hospital and later Winthrop-University Hospital.
Achievements
In 2010, NYU Langone received a Gold Seal of Approval from the Joint Commission, reflecting a commitment to high-quality care, and in 2009, the Rusk Institute and Hospital for Joint Diseases received accreditation from the Commission on Accreditation of Rehabilitation Facilities.
On July 28, 2011, Becker's Hospital Review listed the Hospital for Joint Diseases at NYU Langone Health under 60 Hospitals With Great Orthopedic Programs.
NYU Langone Health has earned a 5-star rating for safety, quality, and patient experience from the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Service.
U.S. News & World Report
NYU Langone was ranked No. 3 on the U.S. News & World Report "Best Hospitals" 2022-2023 Honor Roll. In addition, NYU Langone rose to No. 1 in New York state and No.1 in the New York metro area.