Ogura Hyakunin Isshu
Hyakunin Isshu (百人一首) is a classical Japanese anthology of one hundred Japanese waka by one hundred poets. Hyakunin isshu can be translated to "one hundred people, one poem [each]"; it can also refer to the card game of uta-garuta, which uses a deck composed of cards based on the Hyakunin Isshu.
The most famous and standard version was compiled by Fujiwara no Teika (1162–1241) while he lived in the Ogura district of Kyoto. It is therefore also known as Ogura Hyakunin Isshu (小倉百人一首).
Compilation
One of Teika's diaries, the Meigetsuki (明月記), says that his son Tameie asked him to arrange one hundred poems for Tameie's father-in-law, Utsunomiya Yoritsuna, who was furnishing a residence near Mount Ogura; hence the full name of Ogura Hyakunin Isshu. In order to decorate screens of the residence, Fujiwara no Teika produced the calligraphy poem sheets.
Hishikawa Moronobu (1618–1694) provided woodblock portraits for each of the poets included in the anthology. Katsukawa Shunshō (1726–1793) designed prints for a full-color edition published in 1775.
In his own lifetime, Teika was better known for other work.  For example, in 1200 (Shōji 2), Teika prepared another anthology of one hundred poems for ex-Emperor Go-Toba. This was called the Shōji Hyakushu.
Poets
Poems
Poem number 1
A poem by Emperor Tenji about the hardships of farmers. Teika chose this poem from the Gosen Wakashū:
Poem number 2
A visually-descriptive poem attributed to Empress Jitō. Teika chose this poem from the Shin Kokin Wakashū:
The original was likely based from a poem of the Man'yōshū (book 1, poem 28) by the same poet.
Poem number 26
A quite different poem is attributed to Sadaijin Fujiwara no Tadahira in the context of a very specific incident.  After abdicating, former Emperor Uda visited Mount Ogura in Yamashiro Province. He was so greatly impressed by the beauty of autumn colours of the maples that he ordered Fujiwara no Tadahira to encourage Uda's son and heir, Emperor Daigo, to visit the same area.
Prince Tenshin or Teishin (貞信公, Teishin-kō) was Tadahira's posthumous name, and this is the name used in William Porter's translation of the poem which observes that "[t]he maples of Mount Ogura / If they could understand / Would keep their brilliant leaves / until [t]he Ruler of this land / Pass with his Royal band."  The accompanying 18th century illustration shows a person of consequence riding an ox in a procession with attendants on foot.  The group is passing through an area of maple leaves.
Teika chose this poem from the Shūi Wakashū for the hundred poems collection:
Poem number 86
A poem by Saigyō about the pain of love. This poem was chosen from the Senzai Wakashū:
English translations
The Ogura Hyakunin Isshu has been translated into many languages and into English many times, beginning with Yone Noguchi's Hyaku Nin Isshu in English in 1907.
Other translations include:
Other Hyakunin Isshu anthologies
Many other anthologies compiled along the same criteria—one hundred poems by one hundred poets—include the words hyakunin isshu, notably the World War II-era Aikoku Hyakunin Isshu (愛国百人一首), or One Hundred Patriotic Poems by One Hundred Poets. Also important is Kyōka Hyakunin Isshu (狂歌百人一首), a series of parodies of the original Ogura collection.
Card game
Teika's anthology is the basis for the card game of karuta, which has been popular since the Edo period.
Many forms of playing games with Hyakunin Isshu exist in Japan, such as Uta-garuta, the basis for competitive karuta (kyōgi karuta).
See also
Notes
References
SINSOUGOU ZUSETSUKOKUGO revised edition, TOKYO SHOSEKI CO., LTD.(2016), Teruo Ikeuchi・Youichi Misumi・Hideo Yosiwara.
KOGOZITEN 10th edition, OBUNSHA(2008), Akari Matsumura・Akiho Yamaguchi・Toshimasa Wada.
ZENYAKU KOGOZITEN 4th edition, OBUNSYA(2011), Masaru Miyakoshi・Masami Ishii・Masaru Oda
Further reading