Oops!... I Did It Again (album)
Oops!... I Did It Again is the second studio album by American pop singer Britney Spears, released on May 3, 2000, through Jive Records. Though much in the vein of her debut album ...Baby One More Time (1999), a pop, dance-pop, and teen pop record, the album incorporates more funkier sounds. Contributions to the album's production came from a wide range of producers, including Max Martin, Rami Yacoub, Per Magnusson, David Kreuger, Kristian Lundin, Jake Schulze, Darkchild, and Robert John "Mutt" Lange.
Upon its release, Oops!... I Did It Again received positive reviews from music critics, who praised its production, sonic quality, and Spears's vocal performance. The album became a massive commercial success, debuting at number one in over fifteen countries while peaking inside the top ten in various others. In the United States, it debuted at number one on the  Billboard 200, with first-week sales of 1.319 million copies, becoming the fastest-selling album by a female artist since Nielsen SoundScan began tracking point-of-sale music purchases in 1991. This record was broken fifteen years later by Adele's 25, which sold over 3.38 million copies in its first week of release. It became Spears's second consecutive album to be certified diamond by the Recording Industry Association of America, denoting sales of over ten million copies in the United States, making Spears at age 18 the youngest artist to have multiple diamond albums. With worldwide sales of over 20 million copies, Oops!... I Did It Again is one of the best-selling albums of all-time.
Four singles were released to promote the album. Its title track was commercially successful in a number of territories, reaching number one in fifteen countries and peaking at number nine on the US Billboard Hot 100. Its second single, "Lucky", peaked at number one in Austria, Germany, Sweden, and Switzerland, within the top ten in Australia, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Ireland, Italy, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Romania, and the United Kingdom, and at number 23 on the US Billboard Hot 100. Its third single, "Stronger", reached the top ten in Austria, Finland, Germany, Poland, Romania, Sweden, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom, and peaked at number 11 on the US Billboard Hot 100. "Stronger" became the highest-selling single off the album, receiving a gold certification in Australia, Denmark, Germany, New Zealand, Sweden, and the United States. Its final single, "Don't Let Me Be the Last to Know", was moderately successful on the charts, peaking at number one in Romania, and within the top ten in Austria, Poland, and Switzerland, but failed to chart on the US Billboard Hot 100. To promote the album, Spears performed on several television shows and award ceremonies, including a controversial performance at the 2000 MTV Video Music Awards. She also was the host and musical guest for the first time on Saturday Night Live. Furthermore, Spears embarked on a concert tour, entitled the Oops!... I Did It Again Tour, starting on June 20, 2000 and ending at the Rock in Rio festival on January 18, 2001.
Recording and production
—Spears on the progression of her material for the album.
After vacationing for six days following the completion of the ...Baby One More Time Tour in September 1999, Spears returned to New York City to begin recording songs for her next album; the majority of the recording took place in November. It featured contributions from Max Martin, Eric Foster White, Diane Warren, Robert Lange, Steve Lunt, and Babyface. The songs "Oops!... I Did It Again", "Walk on By" (later covered by Gareth Gates), "What U See (Is What U Get)", and "Don't Go Knockin' on My Door" were the first to be recorded at Martin's Cheiron Studios in the first week of November; followed by "Stronger" and "Lucky", which were finalized (along with the title track) in January 2000. Spears recorded "Don't Let Me Be the Last to Know" at Robert Lange's villa in Switzerland in December 1999; Lange produced the song. "Where Are You Now" was an outtake from ...Baby One More Time. "Girl in the Mirror" and "Can't Make You Love Me"'s instrumental track and melody were recorded in the fall of 1999 in Sweden, with Spears recording the vocals in mid-January at Parc Studios in Orlando, Florida. Spears returned to New York, linking up with producer Steve Lunt to record Diane Warren's "When Your Eyes Say It" at Battery Studios on Friday, January 28, 2000, which preceded her TRL appearance that day. "One Kiss from You" was also recorded at Battery Studios but was later finished at 3rd Floor in New York City. Spears also recorded the last track for the album "Dear Diary" which would later be completed at East Bay Recording in Tarrytown, New York and at Avatar Studios in New York City. Another song recorded during these sessions was "Heart". Her cover of "(I Can't Get No) Satisfaction" was recorded with Rodney Jerkins at Pacifique Recording Studios in Hollywood, California during February 24–26, 2000 after attending the 42nd Annual Grammy Awards.
By January, the then-untitled album was halfway to completion; Spears had worked on it primarily in the United States and Sweden, and finalized material in New York City. She was heavily pressured after ...Baby One More Time's huge commercial success, stating: "It's kind of hard following ten million, I have to say. But after listening to the new material and recording it, I'm really confident with it." Upon the release of Oops!...I Did It Again, Spears said: "I mean, of course there's some pressure", and added: "But in my opinion, [Oops!] is a lot better than the first album. It's edgier – it has more of an attitude. It's more me, and I think teenagers will relate to it more." Geoff Mayfield, director of Billboard charts, added that the decision to release Oops!... I Did It Again less than a year and a half after Spears's debut amounts to "very smart timing. My philosophy is when you have a young fan base, get 'em while they're hot."
Music and lyrics
Oops!... I Did It Again was considered as a sequel to Spears's debut album, ...Baby One More Time (1999), percolating with a carefully measured blend of familiar pop, funk, R&B and power balladry. Spears said during an interview that the album has a more mature, R&B-flavored pop sound. "It's not something I changed purposefully", Spears said of the album's sound and added: "It's just something that kind of changed on itself with me being older. My voice has changed a little bit and I'm more confident, and I think that comes across on the material." One of its producers, Rodney "Darkchild" Jerkins talked about working with Spears on a Rolling Stones cover, stating: "It's going to shock everybody", adding: "It has flavors of the original, but it's a straight 2000 version — new to the ear. Which I think is cool, because people who appreciate that song are going to love it. And I made it so new and young that the young kids that love Britney are going to love it. It's going to grab both a mature and young audience." Spears worked with Robert "Mutt" Lange on "Don't Let Me Be the Last to Know", telling MTV News: "When you hear the song, it's so pure and delicate. It's just one of those songs that pull you in", and added: "I think they wrote it 'specially for me, because the lyrics of the song, if you really listen … they're more of what I can relate to, 'cause they're kind of young lyrics, I think. I don't think Shania would probably sing some of the words that I'm saying."
The title track and opening song, "Oops!... I Did It Again", was compared to her debut single, "...Baby One More Time" (1998), featuring a slap-and-pop bassline, synthesizer chord stabs and a mechanized beat. Lyrically, the song sees Spears warning to an overeager prospective lover: "Oops, you think I'm in love/That I'm sent from above — I'm not that innocent." The song also breaks down for a spoken-word interlude, involving a line from the film Titanic (1997). The second track "Stronger" is a synthpop and R&B-infused track, which is lyrically a declaration of independence, where Spears leaves a partner who treats her like property. The line "my loneliness ain't killing me no more" makes reference to the verse "my loneliness is killing me" from her song "...Baby One More Time". Another R&B-infused track, which also adds a bit more funk to the mix, "Don't Go Knocking on My Door" finds Spears confidently forging ahead after a breakup. The fourth track, a cover of the Rolling Stones' "(I Can't Get No) Satisfaction", begins with mushy guitar plucking and breathy coos, until a dry, crackling lockstep is thrown down, turning the song into an urban stomp. The dance-pop version also jettisons the song's final verse and adds some new lyrics ("how white my shirts could be" becomes "how tight my skirt should be"). "[It] was my idea [to record the song]", Spears said. "I was just like, 'I like this song,' and I think it will be a really cool combination working with [hip-hop producer] Rodney [Jerkins] and doing a really funky song like that." The fifth track, "Don't Let Me Be the Last to Know", was co-written by country-pop singer-songwriter Shania Twain and her then-husband, producer Robert "Mutt" Lange, who also produced the track. The ballad, which boasts a slinky keyboard riff and Lange's characteristically lavish production, finds Spears allowing a bit of country twang into her vocals as she begs a lover to reveal his feelings: "My friends say you're into me ... but I need to hear it straight from you", she sings.
The sixth track "What U See (Is What U Get)" demands respect by rebuking a jealous partner, while the seventh track, "Lucky", is a heart-rending tale of a Hollywood starlet's loneliness, proving that fame can be empty. "If there's nothing missing in my life/Then why do these tears come at night?", she asks. "School crush" is the theme of "One Kiss from You", a track that has a reggae-style beat and lyrics about the feelings of falling in love, and the quickness of it, with Spears cooing that after only one kiss she sees her entire future with her lover. The ballad "Where Are You Now" talks about wanting to know where a previous love is, and what that person is up to, so that she can finally let them go and find closure. Lines on "Can't Make You Love Me", a Europop song, state that fancy cars and money pale in comparison to true love, with Spears singing: "I'm just a girl with a crush on you." The mid-tempo, synth-backed "When Your Eyes Say It", written by songwriter Diane Warren, combines a string section with a loping hip hop beat, while Spears makes her own songwriting debut on the modest, keyboard-driven ballad "Dear Diary", which she said is autobiographical. On the track, she sings of wanting to become "so much more than friends" with a boy.
Release and promotion
In late 1999, Spears promoted then-upcoming Oops!... I Did It Again in Europe, appearing on Smash Hits in the United Kingdom. In Italy, she did a short interview on the television show TRL Italy in early 2000. In Australia, Spears appeared on Russell Gilbert Live and The House of Hits. In the United States, Spears embarked on her (You Drive Me) Crazy Tour on March 8; the tour ended with a free concert in Honolulu, Hawaii on April 24, which aired on Fox as a television special titled Britney Spears in Hawaii.
In Japan, Spears had a press event at Kokusai Forum Hall in Tokyo on May 2, and Oops!... I Did It Again was released the following day. Spears gave a surprise performance in Paris on May 6. In the US, Spears was interviewed on Late Night with Conan O'Brien on May 10, hosted and performed on Saturday Night Live on May 13, and appeared on The Rosie O'Donnell Show on May 15. On May 14, she appeared at MTV's Times Square studios for two hours of "Britney Live", and held her post-Total Request Live listening party titled "Britney's First Listen" on May 16, the day Oops!... I Did It Again was released in the US. She also performed on The Tonight Show with Jay Leno on May 23, and appeared on Teen People's 25 Under 25 on May 26.
Spears performed "Oops!... I Did It Again" and "Lucky" on MTV's All Access: Backstage with Britney, which aired on July 19. On September 7, at the 2000 MTV Video Music Awards in New York City at the Radio City Music Hall, Spears gave a memorable live performance, which included a cover of the Rolling Stones's hit single "(I Can't Get No) Satisfaction" (1965) and her own "Oops!... I Did It Again". While she began her segment in a black suit, she shocked the audience and the media by ripping it off to display a revealing, skin-colored stage outfit with hundreds of strategically placed Swarovski crystals. In Spain, she was interviewed on El Rayo, which aired on September 8.
The album's supporting tour, the Oops!... I Did It Again Tour, was scheduled to begin on June 15 but started five days later, visiting North America during the summer and Europe during the fall, hence becoming Spears's first European tour. On June 24, Spears was featured in a print and television advertising campaign for Clairol's Herbal Essences shampoo line. In a special coup for Clairol, Spears recorded her own song for the brand, titled "I've Got the Urge to Herbal", which was featured in 60-second radio spots and was part of a pre-concert video presentation for the tour, which Herbal Essences sponsored. The tour ended with a concert during Rock in Rio in Brazil on January 18, 2001.
Singles
According to Billboard, as of 2022, Oops!... I Did It Again is one of the 15 best-performing 21st-century albums without any of its singles being number-one hits on the Billboard Hot 100; its only top-ten hit was its 
lead single and title track, which reached number nine. In addition to its worldwide popularity, it became Spears's third top-ten hit single on the US Billboard Hot 100; however, in comparison to the huge success of her debut single "...Baby One More Time", Jive Records considered "Oops!... I Did It Again" a minor disappointment. The song peaked at number one on the US Mainstream Top 40, holding the record for the most radio additions in one day. "Oops!... I Did It Again" peaked atop the charts in Australia, Belgium, Canada, Italy, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Romania, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland and the United Kingdom. An accompanying music video for "Oops!... I Did It Again" saw Spears on Mars in now-iconic red shiny catsuit, while she is visited by an American astronaut who hands her the fictional Heart of the Ocean jewel which Rose threw into the sea at the end of Titanic.
The album's second single, "Lucky", was released on July 25, 2000 and received positive response from the music critics, who considered one of her best offerings from the album. Commercially, "Lucky" topped the charts in Austria, Germany, Sweden and Switzerland, while reaching number five on the UK Singles Chart. In the United States, "Lucky" only managed to peak at number twenty-three on the Billboard Hot 100 chart and at number nine on the Mainstream Top 40. The "glittery" music video sees Spears as the narrator and an actress named Lucky, who is a melancholy movie star and shows her conflicted relationship to fame.
The third single, "Stronger", was released on October 31, 2000 and became the album's second highest-charting single in the United States, peaking at number eleven on the Billboard Hot 100 and number one on the Hot Single Sales. It reached number seven on the UK Singles Chart. Its music video sees Spears catching her boyfriend cheating on her at a futuristic turntable nightclub, driving off, getting in a wreck and singing in the rain, while the chair sequence in the video was inspired by Janet Jackson's video for "The Pleasure Principle".
The fourth and final single, "Don't Let Me Be the Last to Know", was released on March 12, 2001 and is one of Spears' favorite tracks of her career. In the United States, the song performed well below expectations, failing to chart on the Billboard Hot 100 nor the Mainstream Top 40. However, the song attained success in Europe, topping the Romanian Top 100 and peaking inside the top ten in Austria, Poland and Switzerland, while just missing the top ten in Germany, Ireland, Sweden and the United Kingdom, peaking at number twelve in all of them. The music video was considered too racy at the time, portraying Spears in love scenes with her fictional boyfriend, played by French model Brice Durand.
"You Got It All" received a promotional release in France in May 2000. A promotional CD single for "When Your Eyes Say It" was released in the United Kingdom in January 2001.
Critical reception
Oops!... I Did It Again received favorable reviews from music critics. At Metacritic, which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics, Oops!... I Did It Again received an average score of 72, based on 12 reviews, indicating "generally favorable reviews". Giving the album four out of five stars, Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic noted that the album "has the same combination of sweetly sentimental ballads and endearingly gaudy dance-pop that made 'One More Time'," but remarked that, "Fortunately, she and her production team not only have a stronger overall set of songs this time, but they also occasionally get carried away with the same bewildering magpie aesthetic, [...] giv[ing] the album character apart from the well-crafted dance-pop and ballads that serve as its heart. In the end, it's what makes this an entertaining, satisfying listen." Billboard magazine wrote that "'Oops!...' indicates that she's developing a soulful edge and emotional depth that can't be conjured with a glass-shattering note," praising the album for consistently cast[ing] Spears as a young woman coming to terms with her inner power—and that's a darn good message to offer an impressionable audience." Entertainment Weekly's David Browne gave the album a B-rating, writing that the album "reminds us once again that the best new pop can be a blast of cool air in a stifling room."
Rob Sheffield of Rolling Stone gave the album a three-and-a-half out of five stars rating, calling the album "fantastic pop cheese, with much better song-factory hooks than 'N Sync or BSB get", also noting that "the great thing about Oops!, under the cheese surface, is complex, fierce and downright scary, making her a true child of rock & roll tradition." A writer of NME reported that "she's modern-day pop perfection realised in a nearly, human form", commenting that "she's done it again." Lennat Mak of MTV Asia named it "a brilliant second album", writing that Spears "is armed with a more mature and seasoned pop star look, stronger and poppier songs, and of course, extensive media exposure." Andy Battaglia of Salon called the album "a masterpiece of sorts not for its message but for the way it applies the conventions of the pop-musical medium." Website The A.V. Club was more mixed, calling it "a joyless bit of redundant, obvious, competent cheese, recycling itself at every turn and soliciting songwriting from such soulless hacks as Diane Warren and assorted Swedes."
Commercial performance
In the United States, Oops!... I Did It Again reportedly sold 500,000 copies in its first day of release. It debuted at number one on the Billboard 200 chart, with first-week sales of 1,319,193 copies. With its success, Spears held the record for the highest first-week sales by a female artist. This record was held for 15 years, only to be surpassed in November 2015 by the album 25 by Adele, which sold over 3.38 million albums in the United States in its first week. The album fell to number two in its second week, with additional sales of 612,000 copies. It held this position for fifteen consecutive weeks. By its fifth week of availability, Oops!... I Did It Again had sold over three million copies and had passed five million copies by August. On its seventeenth week on the chart, it was certified septuple Platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) for shipments of seven million units. The album spent eighty-four weeks on the Billboard 200, thirty-one weeks on the Canadian Albums Chart, and two weeks on the US Catalog Albums. Oops!... I Did It Again debuted at number eighty-two on the European Top 100 Albums, and quickly peaked at number one; it sold over four million copies within the continent, being certified four-times Platinum by the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry. Oops!... I Did It Again reached number two on the UK Albums Chart, selling 88,000 copies in the first week of release; it remained in the top five for four weeks. The album debuted at number one in Canada, selling 95,275 copies in its first week.
It topped the French Albums Chart and the German Offizielle Top 100, also being certified triple Platinum by the British Phonographic Industry (BPI), double Gold by the Syndicat National de l'Édition Phonographique (SNEP) and triple Platinum by Bundesverband Musikindustrie (BVMI), denoting shipments to retailers of 900,000 units, 200,000 copies sold and 900,000 units shipped, respectively. Additionally, the album debuted at number two on the Australian Albums Chart, and spent ten weeks in the top twenty; it became the fourteenth highest-selling of 2000 in the country and was certified double Platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association (ARIA) the following year after shipping 140,000 copies to retailers. Oops!... I Did It Again opened at number three on the New Zealand Albums Chart and was certified Gold after just one week on the chart. The Recording Industry Association of New Zealand (RIANZ) ultimately certified it double Platinum. Oops!... I Did It Again became the third best-selling album of 2000 in the United States, selling 7,893,544 albums according to Nielsen SoundScan and fourth best-selling album according to Billboard Year-End of 2000. On January 24, 2005, the album was certified decuple Platinum (Diamond) by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA). Also, the album landed at number twenty-seven on BMG Music Club all-time best-sellers list with 1.21 million units, behind Shania Twain's The Woman in Me (1.24 million) and Nirvana's Nevermind (1.24 million). As of July 2009, the album has sold 9,184,000 copies in the United States, excluded copies sold through clubs, such as the BMG Music Service.
Worldwide, Oops!... I Did It Again sold 2.5 million copies in its first week (second highest first week sales by a female artist worldwide) and sold 15 million copies by the end of the year. It was the best-selling female album and 3rd best selling album of 2000. The album has sold 20 million copies worldwide.
Controversy
Musicians Michael Cottril and Lawrence Wnukowski filed a copyright case against Spears, Zomba Recording Corporation, Jive Records, Wright Entertainment Group and BMG Music Publishing, claiming Spears' "What U See (Is What U Get)" and "Can't Make You Love Me" are "virtually identical" to one of their songs. Cottrill and Wnukowski claimed that they authored, recorded and copyrighted a song called "What You See Is What You Get" in 1999 to one of Spears' representatives for consideration on a future album, though it was rejected. The case was later dismissed after it was ruled that they lacked sufficient evidence and that there "weren't enough similarities between the two songs to prove copyright infringement."
Track listing
Notes
Personnel
Credits adapted from AllMusic.
See also
Notes