Oregon State Senate
The Oregon State Senate is the upper house of the statewide legislature for the US state of Oregon. Along with the lower chamber Oregon House of Representatives it makes up the Oregon Legislative Assembly. There are 30 members of the state Senate, representing 30 districts across the state, each with a population of 127,700. The state Senate meets in the east wing of the Oregon State Capitol in Salem.
Oregon state senators serve four-year terms without term limits. In 2002, the Oregon Supreme Court struck down the decade-old Oregon Ballot Measure 3, that had restricted state senators to two terms (eight years) on procedural grounds.
Like certain other upper houses of state and territorial legislatures and the United States Senate, the state Senate can confirm or reject gubernatorial appointments to state departments, commissions, boards, and other state governmental agencies.
The current Senate president is Peter Courtney of Salem.
Oregon, along with Arizona, Maine, New Hampshire, and Wyoming, is one of the five U.S. states to not have the office of the lieutenant governor, a position which for most upper houses of state legislatures and for the United States Congress (with the vice president) is the head of the legislative body and holder of the casting vote in the event of a tie. Instead, a separate position of Senate president is in place, removed from the state executive branch. If the chamber is tied, legislators must devise their own methods of resolving the impasse. In 2002, for example, Oregon's state senators entered into a power sharing contract whereby Democratic senators nominated the Senate President while Republican senators chaired key committees.
Milestones
Kathryn Clarke was the first woman to serve in Oregon's Senate. Women became eligible to run for the Oregon state legislature in 1914 and later that year Clarke was appointed to fill a vacant seat in Douglas county by her cousin, governor Oswald West. Following some controversy concerning whether West had the authority to appoint someone to fill the vacancy, Clarke campaigned and was elected by voters in 1915. She took office five years before Nineteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution protected the right of all American women to vote.
In 1982, Mae Yih became the first Chinese-American elected to a state senate in the United States.
Redistricting
During the 2011 legislative session, the House and Senate passed Senate Bill 989, which implemented new legislative districts for the 2012 elections and beyond.
81st Senate
The 81st Oregon Legislative Assembly, which holds its regular session from 2021 to 2023, has the following leadership:
Senate President: Peter Courtney (D–11 Salem)
President Pro Tempore: James Manning Jr. (D–7 Eugene)
Majority Leader: Rob Wagner (D–19 Lake Oswego)
Minority Leader: Fred Girod (R-9 Stayton) until October 22, 2021; Tim Knopp (R-27 Bend) after
81st Senate Committee Assignments
Senators are each assigned to one or more committees.
Education
Energy and Environment
Finance and Revenue
Health Care
Housing and Development
Human Services, Mental Health and Recovery
Judiciary and Ballot Measure 110 Implementation
Labor and Business
Natural Resources and Wildfire Recovery
Rules
Veterans and Emergency Preparedness
Conduct
See also
Notes