Paul Feyerabend
Paul Karl Feyerabend (German: [ˈfaɪɐˌʔaːbm̩t]; January 13, 1924 – February 11, 1994) was an Austrian-born philosopher of science best known for his work in the philosophy of science at the University of California, Berkeley, where he worked for three decades (1958–1989). At various points in his life, he held appointments at the University of Bristol, London School of Economics, University of Sussex, Oxford University (All Souls College), Stanford University, University of Kassel, University of Auckland, Yale University, TU Berlin, and, finally, ETH Zurich.


His most famous work is Against Method (1975), which infamously claimed that there are no universal methodological rules for scientific inquiry. Feyerabend also wrote on topics related to the politics of science in several essays and his book Science in a Free Society (1978). Feyerabend’s later works include Wissenschaft als Kunst (Science as Art) (1984), Farewell to Reason (1987), and Three Dialogues on Knowledge (1991), Conquest of Abundance (released posthumously in 1999) which contain collections of Feyerabend's essays from the 1980s until his death in 1994. Philosophy of Nature,  released posthumously in 2016, contains Feyerabend’s reconstruction of the history of natural philosophy from the Homeric Period until the mid 20th century. In these works and other publications, Feyerabend wrote about numerous issues within ethics, ancient philosophy, philosophy of art, political philosophy, medicine, and physics. Feyerabend’s final work was his autobiography, entitled  Killing Time, which he completed on his deathbed.
Feyerabend is often recognized as one of the most important philosophers of science in the 20th century. In a recent poll, Feyerabend was ranked as the 8th most significant philosopher of science. He is often mentioned, alongside Thomas Kuhn, Imre Lakatos, and N.R. Hanson, as a crucial figure in the historical turn and his work on scientific pluralism was markedly influential on the Stanford School and much of contemporary philosophy of science. He was also a significant figure in the sociology of scientific knowledge. Asteroid (22356) Feyerabend is named in his honour. Moreover, the Paul K. Feyerabend Foundation was founded in 2006 in his honor which aims to “promote the empowerment and wellbeing of disadvantaged human communities. By strengthening intra and inter-community solidarity the Foundation strives to improve local capacities, promote the respect of human rights, and sustain cultural and biological diversity.”
Biography
Early life
Feyerabend was for in 1924 in Vienna. His paternal grandfather was the illegitimate child of a housekeeper, Helena Feierabend, who introduced the ‘y’ into ‘Feyerabend.' His father, originally from Carinthia, was an officer in the merchant marine in World War I in Istria and a civil servant in Vienna until he died due to complications from a stroke. His mother’s family came from Stockerau. She was a seamstress and died on July 29, 1943 by suicide. He lived in the Wolfganggasse where he witnessed constant violence and angry disagreements and was sexually assaulted when he was 13. He was often plagued by many health problems and was raised Catholic. He went to realgymanisum where he excelled in school as a vorzugsschüler (top student), especially in physics and mathematics (inspired by his teacher Oswald Thomas) where he developed a reputation as knowing more than the teachers. He was a voracious reader, especially of mystery and adventure novels and plays, and stumbled onto philosophy. He first read works from Plato, Descartes, and Büchner and became interested in the dramatic power of argument. He later became interested in philosophy of science through the works of Mach, Eddington, and Dingler and was fascinated by Nietzsche's Thus Spoke Zarathustra and his depiction of the "lonely man."  At 13, he built his own telescope with his father and became an observer for the Swiss Institute of Solar Research.
During high school, Feyerabend began his lifelong interest in singing. He sang in a choir under Leo Lehner and was later introduced to opera and was inspired by performances from George Oeggl and Hans Hotter. He later trained formally under the tutelage of Adolf Vogel and others.
Nazi Occupation of Austria and World War II
Feyerabend’s parents were both welcoming of the Anschluss. His mother was entranced by Hitler’s voice and demeanour and his father was similarly impressed by Hitler’s charisma and later joined the Nazi Party. Feyerabend himself was unmoved by the Anschluss or World War II, which he saw as an inconvenience that got in the way of reading and astronomy. Feyerabend was in the Hitler Youth and sometimes rebelled, such as praising the British or claiming he had to leave a meeting to attend mass, and sometimes conformed and brought in members who missed meetings. After the war, Feyerabend recounts that he "did not accept the aims of Nazism" and that he "hardly knew what they were."
After graduating from high school in April 1942 he was drafted into the German Arbeitsdienst (working service). After basic training in Pirmasens, he was assigned to a unit in Quelern en Bas, near Brest. Feyerabend described the work he did during that period as monotonous: "we moved around in the countryside, dug ditches, and filled them up again." After a short leave he volunteered for officer school. In his autobiography he writes that he hoped the war would be over by the time he had finished his education as an officer. This turned out not to be the case. From December 1943 on, he served as an officer on the northern part of the Eastern Front, was decorated with an Iron cross, and attained the rank of lieutenant. When the German army started its retreat from the advancing Red Army, Feyerabend was hit by three bullets while directing traffic. One hit him in the spine which left him temporarily paralyzed. As a consequence he needed to walk with a cane for the rest of his life, was impotent, and frequently experienced severe pain. After this, he lectured on military history and philosophy in Leipzig until the end of the War.
Post-WWII, PhD, and Early Career in England
After the War, Feyerabend relocated to Apolda. The mayor gave him a job in the education sector and worked in public entertainment including writing speeches, dialogues, and plays. He also joined the Cultural Association for the Democratic Reform of Germany. There, he took a scholarship at the Weimar Academy and commuted where he took lessons in Italian, harmony, singing, enunciation, and piano.
Feyerabend then moved back to Vienna and was permitted to pursue a PhD at the University of Vienna. He originally intended to study physics, astronomy, and mathematics (while continuing to practice singing) but decided to study history and sociology to understand is wartime experiences. He became dissatisfied, however, and soon transferred to physics and studied astronomy, especially observational astronomy and perturbation theory, as well as differential equations, nuclear physics, algebra, and tensor analysis. He took classes with Hans Thirring, Hans Leo Przibram, and Felix Ehrenhaft. He also had a small role in a film directed by G.W. Pabst and joined the Austrian College where he frequented their speaker series in Alpbach. Here, in 1948, Feyerabend met Popper who made a positive impression on him. He got married to his first wife, Jacqueline, which was largely a marriage of convenience. He was influenced by the Marxist playwright Bertolt Brecht, who invited him to be his assistant at the East Berlin State Opera, but Feyerabend turned down the offer. Feyerabend organized the Kraft Circle where students and faculty discussed many topics, especially the problem of the existence of the external world. There, he met Elizabeth Anscombe who, in turn, led Feyerabend to meet Wittgenstein. In 1951 he earned his doctorate with a thesis on basic statements (Zur Theorie der Basissätze) under Victor Kraft's supervision.
He was then invited to be Popper’s assistant in London where he studied Bohm and von Neumann’s work in quantum mechanics and Wittgenstein’s later works such as Remarks on the Foundations of Mathematics and Philosophical Investigations. He witnessed Popper’s lectures on scientific method, where he became convinced that induction was irrational. He developed an early version of his theory of incommensurability, which he thought was a triviality, and was encouraged to develop it further by Popper, H.L.A. Hart, Peter Geach, and Georg Henrik von Wright. He met many others including Joseph Agassi, J.O. Wisdom, and Martin Buber.
After his contract had ended, Feyerabend briefly returned to Vienna where he translated Popper’s The Open Society and Its Enemies into English. He also met Viktor Frankl and Arthur Pap, who offered him a position as his research assistant. Feyerabend then received a job offer from Bristol with letters of reference from Popper and Erwin Schrödinger. In Bristol, Feyerabend met Philipp Frank who argued that Aristotle was a better empiricist than Copernicus. This argument became influential on Feyerabend’s primary case study in Against Method. He met his second wife, Mary O’Neill, in 1958 and they separated soon afterwards. After presenting a paper on the measurement problem, he was invited to the University of Minnesota by Michael Scriven where he met Herbert Feigl, Ernst Nagel, Wilfred Sellars, Hilary Putnam, and Adolf Grünbaum. Soon after, he met Gilbert Ryle who said of Feyerabend that he was “clever and mischievous like a barrel of monkeys."
Academia
In 1955, Feyerabend received his first academic appointment at the University of Bristol, where he lectured on the philosophy of science. Later in his life he worked as a professor (or equivalent) at Berkeley, Auckland, Kassel, Sussex, Yale, London, Berlin and ETH Zurich. During this time, he developed a critical view of science; he later described his own position as 'anarchistic' or 'dadaistic' to illustrate his rejection of the dogmatic use of rules, a position incompatible with the contemporary rationalistic culture in the philosophy of science. At the London School of Economics, Feyerabend met a colleague of Popper, Imre Lakatos, with whom he planned to write a dialogue volume in which Lakatos would defend a rationalist view of science and Feyerabend would attack it. This planned joint publication was put to an end by Lakatos's sudden death in 1974. Against Method became a famous criticism of current philosophical views of science and provoked many reactions. In his autobiography, he reveals that he suffered from depression:
Feyerabend moved to the University of California, Berkeley in California in 1958 and became a U.S. citizen. Following (visiting) professorships (or their equivalent) at University College London, Berlin, and Yale, he taught at the University of Auckland, New Zealand in 1972 and 1974, always returning to California. He later enjoyed alternating between posts at ETH Zurich and Berkeley through the 1980s but left Berkeley for good in October 1989, first to Italy, then finally to Zurich. After his retirement in 1991, Feyerabend continued to publish papers and worked on his autobiography. After a short period of suffering from a brain tumor, he died in 1994 at the Genolier Clinic, overlooking Lake Geneva, Switzerland.
Thought
Nature of scientific method
In Against Method and Science in a Free Society Feyerabend defended the idea that there are no methodological rules which are always used by scientists. Feyerabend objected to method, because he believed that any single prescriptive scientific method would limit the activities of scientists, and hence restrict scientific progress. In his view, science would benefit most from a "dose" of theoretical anarchism. He also thought that theoretical anarchism was desirable because it was more humanitarian than other systems of organization, by not imposing rigid rules on scientists.
Feyerabend's position was seen as radical in the philosophy of science, because it implies that philosophy can neither succeed in providing a general description of science, nor in devising a method for differentiating products of science from non-scientific entities like myths. (Feyerabend's position also implies that philosophical guidelines should be ignored by scientists, if they are to aim for progress.)
To support his position that methodological rules generally do not contribute to scientific success, Feyerabend analyzed counterexamples to the claim that (good) science operates according to a certain fixed method. Starting from episodes in science that are generally regarded as indisputable instances of progress (e.g. the Copernican revolution), he argued that these episodes violated all common prescriptive rules of science. Moreover, he claimed that applying such rules in these historical situations would actually have prevented scientific revolution.
Feyerabend attacks is the consistency criterion as a way of evaluating scientific theories. He argues that insisting new theories be consistent with old ones gives old ideas unreasonable advantage. He makes a logical point: simply being compatible with a defunct older theory does not necessarily increase the validity or truth of a new theory over alternatives with comparable coverage. According to Feyerabend, new theories that are compatible with tradition may be more more appealing to scientists in virtue of their familiarity, since they enable scientists to maintain cherished prejudices. In short, preferencing new theories that accord with older traditions over others that don't (ceteris paribus) is an aesthetic choice, rather than a rational one. Hence, such theories can be said to have "an unfair advantage".
Feyerabend also criticized falsificationism, arguing that no interesting theory is ever consistent with all the relevant facts. This would rule out using a naïve falsificationist rule which says that scientific theories should be rejected if they do not agree with known facts. Among others, Feyerabend uses an intentionally provocative description of "renormalization" in quantum mechanics: "This procedure consists in crossing out the results of certain calculations and replacing them by a description of what is actually observed. Thus one admits, implicitly, that the theory is in trouble while formulating it in a manner suggesting that a new principle has been discovered" Against Method. p. 61. While quantum theorists were working on models that did not run into this problem, Feyerabend advocated that scientists should use ad hoc methods such as renormalization. Indeed that such methods are essential to the progress of science for example because "progress in science is uneven".  For instance, in the time of Galileo, optical theory could not account for phenomena that were observed by means of telescopes. So, astronomers who used telescopic observation had to use ad hoc rules  until they could justify their assumptions  by means of "optical theory".
Feyerabend also criticized any guideline that aimed to judge the quality of scientific theories by comparing them to known facts. He thought that previous theory might influence natural interpretations of observed phenomena. Scientists necessarily make implicit assumptions when comparing scientific theories to facts that they observe. Such assumptions need to be changed in order to make the new theory compatible with observations. The main example of the influence of natural interpretations that Feyerabend provided was the tower argument presented as an objection to the theory of a moving earth. Aristotelians assumed that the fact that a stone which is dropped from a tower lands directly beneath it shows that the earth is stationary. They thought that, if the earth moved while the stone was falling, the stone would have been "left behind". Objects would fall diagonally instead of vertically. Since this does not happen, Aristotelians thought that it was evident that the earth did not move. If one uses ancient theories of impulse and relative motion, the Copernican theory indeed appears to be falsified by the fact that objects fall vertically on earth. This observation required a new interpretation to make it compatible with Copernican theory. Galileo was able to make such a change about the nature of impulse and relative motion. Before such theories were articulated, Galileo had to make use of ad hoc methods and proceed counterinductively. So, "ad hoc" hypotheses actually have a positive function: they temporarily make a new theory compatible with facts until the theory to be defended can be supported by other theories.
On the Galileo affair, Feyerabend stated:
Together these remarks sanction the introduction of theories that are inconsistent with well-established facts. Furthermore, a pluralistic methodology that involves making comparisons between any theories at all forces defendants to improve the articulation of each theory. In this way, scientific pluralism improves the critical power of science. Pope Benedict XVI cited Feyerabend to this effect.
According to Feyerabend, new theories came to be accepted not because they accorded with scientific method, but because their supporters made use of any trick – rational, rhetorical or ribald – in order to advance their cause. Without a fixed ideology, or the introduction of religious tendencies, the only approach which does not inhibit progress (using whichever definition one sees fit) is "anything goes": "anything goes" is not a 'principle' I hold... but the terrified exclamation of a rationalist who takes a closer look at history." (Feyerabend, 1975).
Feyerabend considered the possibility of incommensurability, but he was hesitant in his application of the concept. He wrote that "it is hardly ever possible to give an explicit definition of [incommensurability]" Against Method. p. 225., because it involves covert classifications and major conceptual changes. He also was critical of attempts to capture incommensurability in a logical framework, since he thought of incommensurability as a phenomenon outside the domain of logic. In the second appendix of Against Method (p. 114), Feyerabend states, "I never said... that any two rival theories are incommensurable... What I did say was that certain rival theories, so-called 'universal' theories, or 'non-instantial' theories, if interpreted in a certain way, could not be compared easily." Incommensurability did not concern Feyerabend greatly, because he believed that even when theories are commensurable (i.e. can be compared), the outcome of the comparison should not necessarily rule out either theory. To rephrase: when theories are incommensurable, they cannot rule each other out, and when theories are commensurable, they cannot rule each other out. Assessments of (in)commensurability, therefore, don't have much effect in Feyerabend's system, and can be more or less passed over in silence.
In Against Method Feyerabend claimed that Imre Lakatos's philosophy of research programmes is actually "anarchism in disguise", because it does not issue orders to scientists. Feyerabend playfully dedicated Against Method to "Imre Lakatos: Friend, and fellow-anarchist". One interpretation is that Lakatos's philosophy of mathematics and science was based on creative transformations of Hegelian historiographic ideas, many associated with Lakatos's teacher in Hungary Georg Lukács. Feyerabend's debate with Lakatos on scientific method recapitulates the debate of Lukács and (Feyerabend's would-be mentor) Brecht, over aesthetics several decades earlier.
While Feyerabend described himself as an "epistemological anarchist", he explicitly disavowed being a "political anarchist". Some anarchist-leaning critics of science have agreed with this distinction, while others have argued that political anarchism is tacitly embedded in Feyerabend's philosophy of science.
The decline of the physicist-philosopher

Feyerabend was critical of the lack of knowledge of philosophy shown by the generation of physicists that emerged after World War II:
On the other hand, Feyerabend was himself heavily criticized for his misrepresentation of the practices, methods and goals of some of the above-mentioned scientists, especially Mach and Einstein.
Role of science in society
Feyerabend described science as being essentially anarchistic, obsessed with its own mythology, and as making claims to truth well beyond its actual capacity. He was especially indignant about the condescending attitudes of many scientists towards alternative traditions. For example, he thought that negative opinions about astrology and the effectivity of rain dances were not justified by scientific research, and dismissed the predominantly negative attitudes of scientists towards such phenomena as elitist or racist. In his opinion, science has become a repressing ideology, even though it arguably started as a liberating movement. Feyerabend thought that a pluralistic society should be protected from being influenced too much by science, just as it is protected from other ideologies.
Starting from the argument that a historical universal scientific method does not exist, Feyerabend argues that science does not deserve its privileged status in western society. Since scientific points of view do not arise from using a universal method which guarantees high quality conclusions, he thought that there is no justification for valuing scientific claims over claims by other ideologies like religions. Feyerabend also argued that scientific accomplishments such as the moon landings are no compelling reason to give science a special status. In his opinion, it is not fair to use scientific assumptions about which problems are worth solving in order to judge the merit of other ideologies. Additionally, success by scientists has traditionally involved non-scientific elements, such as inspiration from mythical or religious sources.
Based on these arguments, Feyerabend defended the idea that science should be separated from the state in the same way that religion and state are separated in a modern secular society. He envisioned a "free society" in which "all traditions have equal rights and equal access to the centres of power". For example, parents should be able to determine the ideological context of their children's education, instead of having limited options because of scientific standards. According to Feyerabend, science should also be subjected to democratic control: not only should the subjects that are investigated by scientists be determined by popular election, scientific assumptions and conclusions should also be supervised by committees of lay people. He thought that citizens should use their own principles when making decisions about these matters. He rejected the view that science is especially "rational" on the grounds that there is no single common "rational" ingredient that unites all the sciences but excludes other modes of thought.
Philosophy of mind
Along with a number of mid-20th century philosophers (most notably, Wilfrid Sellars, Willard Van Orman Quine, and Richard Rorty), Feyerabend was influential in the development of eliminative materialism, a radical position in the philosophy of mind that holds that our ordinary, common-sense understanding of the mind (what materialist monists call "folk psychology") is false. It is succinctly described by a modern proponent, Paul Churchland, as follows:
In three short papers published in the early sixties, Feyerabend sought to defend materialism against the supposition that the mind cannot be a physical thing. Feyerabend suggested that our commonsense understanding of the mind was incommensurable with the (materialistic) scientific view, but that nevertheless we ought to prefer the materialistic one on general methodological grounds.
This view of the mind/body problem is widely considered one of Feyerabend's most important legacies. Even though Feyerabend himself seems to have given it up in the late 1970s, it was taken up by Richard Rorty and, more recently, by Patricia Churchland and Paul Churchland. In fact, as Keeley observes, "PMC [Paul Churchland] has spent much of his career carrying the Feyerabend mantle forward" (p. 13).
Other works
Some of Feyerabend's work concerns the way in which people's perception of reality is influenced by various rules. In his last book, unfinished when he died, he talks of how our sense of reality is shaped and limited. Conquest of Abundance: A Tale of Abstraction versus the Richness of Being bemoans the propensity we have of institutionalizing these limitations.
The last philosophy book that Feyerabend finished is The Tyranny of Science (written 1993, published May 13, 2011). In it Feyerabend challenges what he sees in his view as some modern myths about science, e.g., he believes that the statement 'science is successful' is a myth. He argues that some very basic assumptions about science are simply false and that substantial parts of scientific ideology were created on the basis of superficial generalizations that led to absurd misconceptions about the nature of human life. He claims that far from solving the pressing problems of our age, scientific theorizing glorifies ephemeral generalities at the cost of confronting the real particulars that make life meaningful.
Popular influence
The book On the Warrior's Path quotes Feyerabend, highlighting the similarities between his epistemology and Bruce Lee's worldview. In a 2015 retrospective on  Thomas Kuhn's theory of paradigm shifts in social science, the philosopher Martin Cohen cites several of Feyerabend's skeptical positions on conventional claims at scientific knowledge and agrees with Feyerabend that Thomas Kuhn himself had only a very hazy idea of what this notion of paradigm shifts might mean, and that Kuhn essentially retreated from the more radical implications of his theory, which were that scientific facts are never really more than opinions, whose popularity is transitory and far from conclusive. Cohen says that although in their lifetimes, Kuhn and Feyerabend made up two viciously opposed sects, they agreed that science consists of long periods of settled agreement (so-called 'normal science') punctuated by radical, conceptual upheaval (so-called paradigm shifts).
Feyerabend's concept of incommensurability was influential in the radical critical approach of Donald Ault in his extensive critical assessment of William Blake's work, especially in Narrative Unbound: Re-Visioning William Blake's The Four Zoas.
Quotations
Selected bibliography
Books
Articles
See also
References
Further reading