Paytm
Paytm (acronym for "pay through mobile") is an Indian digital payments and financial services company, based in Noida. It was founded in 2010 by Vijay Shekhar Sharma under One97 Communications. The company offers mobile payment services to consumers and enables merchants to receive payments through its QR code, point of sale and online payment gateway offerings. In partnership with financial institutions, Paytm offers financial services such as microloans and buy now, pay later to its consumers and merchants. Apart from bill payments and money transfer, the company also provides ticketing services, retail brokerage products and online games.


Paytm's parent company, One97 Communications, got listed on the Indian stock exchanges on 18 November 2021 after an initial public offering, which was the largest in India at the time. For the fiscal year 2021–22, Paytm's gross merchandise value (GMV) was reported to be ₹8,500 billion (US$110 billion).

History
Paytm was founded on August 2010 with an initial investment of US$2 million by founder Vijay Shekhar Sharma  in Noida, India. It started off as a prepaid mobile and DTH recharge platform, and has expanded to a leading digital payments and financial services company , with a diverse range of offerings spanning from partner-based lending to offline devices.
In 2014, the company launched the Paytm Wallet which stirred the digital payments revolution in the country. Paytm launched BHIM UPI and also became India's first payment app to cross over 10 crore app downloads in 2017. In 2018, the company launched the 'Paytm for Business' app for merchants, allowing them to accept money through Paytm Wallet, UPI and card payments directly into their bank accounts at 0% charge.
Paytm started distributing lending products on its platform in partnership with marquee lenders in 2018, starting off with Paytm Postpaid (Buy now pay later) and later expanding to instant personal loans and merchant/business loans. In March 2019, the firm launched a subscription based loyalty program called Paytm First , and later that year, it partnered with Citibank to launch Paytm First credit card 
In July 2021, Paytm's parent company One97 Communications filed a draft red herring prospectus with the Securities and Exchange Board of India to launch its initial public offering (IPO). It launched its IPO in November 2021, raising ₹18,300 crore (US$2.5 billion) at a valuation of close to US$19 billion. At that time, it was the largest ever IPO in India.
Funding and shareholding
Post-IPO shareholding (as of June 2022): 
Investments and acquisitions
In 2013, Paytm acquired Plustxt for under $2 million. Plustxt was started by IT graduates Pratyush Prasanna, Parag Arora, Lokesh Chauhan and Lohit V that allowed fast text messaging in any Indian language.
Paytm invested $5 million in auto-rickshaw aggregator and hyperlocal delivery firm Jugnoo in 2015. It also acquired Delhi-based consumer behaviour prediction platform Shifu and local services startup Near.in. In 2016, it invested in logistics startups LogiNext and XpressBees. Healthcare startup QorQL, which uses artificial intelligence (AI) and big data to assist medical care, received investment from Paytm in April 2017  In July 2017, it acquired a majority stake in online ticketing and events platform Insider.in, backed by event management company Only Much Louder (OML) and mobile loyalty startup MobiQuest. It also acquired Little and nearbuy.com during 2017. an India-based, hyper-local eCommerce company.In December 2017, nearbuy.com merged with Little App, while raising fresh capital from Paytm. As part of the deal, the competitor companies would merge under the leadership of co-founder and CEO Ankur Warikoo, while Paytm would acquire majority ownership of the merged entity.
The company acquired the startup Cube26 in January 2018  and hotel booking platform NightStay in 2019.
Paytm board has approved a resolution which would allot 47,042 equity shares to 60 employees under its ESOP Scheme 2008 and ESOP Scheme 2019.
In October 2021, Paytm acquired digital lending company CreditMate.
International expansion
Japan
Paytm established a joint venture with SoftBank and Yahoo Japan, called PayPay Corporation, to offer services in the Japanese market. Paytm launched the PayPay app, a QR-based payment settlement service, in Japan on 22 October 2018.
Canada
Paytm Labs Inc. was established in Toronto, Ontario in 2014 as a research and development division. It recently launched a fraud risk management platform called Pi for fintechs and digital marketplaces where transaction value is high.
Paytm Insider
Paytm Insider is a mobile app that helps to book tickets for Cricket matches, live entertainment shows and sports games online.
Controversies
California-based PayPal filed a case against Paytm in the Indian trademark office for using a logo with a similar colour combination to its own on 18 November 2016.
In May 2018, the Indian investigative news agency Cobrapost released a video of an undercover reporter meeting with Paytm's vice president, Ajay Shekhar Sharma who is the brother of Vijay Shekhar Sharma. During the meeting, he reportedly said the company had provided the Indian Government with the personal data of Paytm users in the Indian state of Jammu and Kashmir, violating user's privacy and policies. Later, BuzzFeed reported that, Sharma has close ties with India's ruling party Bhartiya Janata Party. Meanwhile, in response, the company tweeted that, it had never shared user's data with third parties, denied the contents in the video, and stated that it had never received requests from law enforcement on Twitter. Paytm also stated that any person claiming otherwise "is not aware of the policy and is not authorised to speak on behalf of the company".
Paytm has alleged that the Indian telecom companies are not blocking numbers used for phishing activities and sued them for ₹100 crores in the Delhi High Court 
On 18 September 2020, the firm's official app was briefly unlisted from the Google Play Store allegedly due to violations of the Play Store's gambling policy. The company claimed that Google did not offer any prior warning or give the company an opportunity to explain its views on the contentious 'cashback' offers while claiming that Google's own payments app Google Pay offered similar 'cashback' offers and suffered no repercussions.
Charity
During the COVID-19 pandemic in India, Paytm contributed ₹10 to every single user who pays to the PM CARES fund via their app; within ten days they had collected ₹100 crores in their app. Their 1,200 employees contributed 15 days or even a few months of their salaries to the fund.
Through their platform, Paytm made 21,000 oxygen concentrators available for people in need, and donated oxygen plants in 13 worst-hit cities to help hospitals get oxygen.
In August 2022, Paytm Foundation partnered with United Nations Environment Program (UNEP) to set up the Air Quality Action Forum (AQAF) to curb air pollution in India.
Awards and recognition