Philippe Coutinho
Philippe Coutinho Correia (born 12 June 1992) is a Brazilian professional footballer who plays as an attacking midfielder or winger for Premier League club Aston Villa and the Brazil national team. He is known for his combination of vision, passing, dribbling and ability to conjure curving long-range strikes.


Born and raised in Rio de Janeiro, Coutinho showed prodigious talent and excelled in Vasco da Gama's youth system. He was signed by Italian club Inter Milan in 2008 for €4 million and subsequently loaned back to Vasco, where he became a key player. He made his debut for Inter Milan in 2010, and was later loaned to La Liga club Espanyol in 2012. In January 2013, Coutinho joined English club Liverpool for £8.5 million. He flourished at Liverpool, being named in the PFA Team of the Year in 2015. In January 2018, Coutinho signed for Barcelona for a club record fee reportedly worth €160 million (making him the world's second most expensive player at the time, and the most expensive midfielder as of 2022), and won two La Liga titles. However, he was loaned to German club Bayern Munich on a season-long loan ahead of the 2019–20 season, being a part of the team that won a treble including the Bundesliga, DFB-Pokal and UEFA Champions League.
Coutinho made his senior international debut in 2010. He was part of the Brazilian squad at the 2015 Copa América and the Copa América Centenario in 2016, and he made his World Cup debut at the 2018 FIFA World Cup, where he scored two goals and was named to the FIFA World Cup Dream Team. He was also a member of the Brazilian team that won the 2019 Copa América on home soil.
Early life
The third and youngest son of Esmeralda Coutinho and architect José Carlos Correia, Coutinho was born on 12 June 1992 in Rio de Janeiro. He was raised in Rio's northern Rocha district between an old shanty town and industrial warehouses.
As a child he was very shy and would prefer to be alone; he started playing football after watching his elder brothers Cristiano and Leandro play with their friends at a local concrete football pitch. He began playing futsal, and he said it helped him develop his skills as a footballer. Coutinho thrived in the street environment, developing skill and improvisation. After Coutinho joined a local football academy on the insistence of his friend's grandmother, his father was approached at a tournament by youth coaches at Vasco da Gama, where Coutinho attended a trial and joined their youth system.
Club career
Vasco da Gama
Coutinho flourished in Vasco da Gama's youth system and was soon called up to the Brazil under-15 football team. In July 2008, at age 16, he was purchased by Italian giants Inter Milan for €4 million. Coutinho remained at Vasco on loan for two years as FIFA prohibited international transfer of footballers until they reached age 18, and he became a regular first-team player despite his young age. In 2009, he made 12 league appearances as Vasco won the Série B title and achieved promotion to the top tier. In 2010, he made 31 appearances and scored 5 goals in all competitions as he established himself as a key first-team player.
Inter Milan
Coutinho's move to Inter Milan became effective in July 2010, after he turned 18, with new manager Rafael Benítez being quoted as saying, "Coutinho is the future of Inter."
On 27 August 2010, Coutinho made his official debut for Inter coming on as a substitute during the Nerazzurri's 2–0 defeat to Atlético Madrid in the 2010 UEFA Super Cup. After dropping out of selection in the starting line-up, he returned to play in the crucial 3–2 win over Bayern Munich in Germany, due to which Inter would progress to the quarter-finals of the UEFA Champions League.
On 8 May 2011, in a 3–1 win at home against Fiorentina, Coutinho scored his first goal for Inter from a free kick that curled over the wall and into the net. His second goal for Inter came in a match against Cagliari on 19 November 2011, where Coutinho received a through-ball from teammate Ricky Álvarez and scored into the bottom left corner of the net to give Inter a 2–0 lead.
Loan to Espanyol
During the 2011–12 season, Coutinho struggled to establish himself in Inter's first team and on 30 January 2012, he joined La Liga club Espanyol on loan until the end of the season. He made his debut for the club on 4 February 2012 under manager Mauricio Pochettino, starting in a 3–3 draw with Athletic Bilbao. The following month, he scored his first goals for the Catalan side when he scored a brace in a 5–1 victory against Rayo Vallecano. He ultimately scored 5 goals in 16 appearances during his loan with Espanyol before returning to Inter at the end of the season.
Return to Inter
Following the expiry of his loan deal with Espanyol, Coutinho returned to Inter Milan but once again struggled to find game time at the San Siro, making just 10 league appearances and scoring 2 goals.
Liverpool
On 26 January 2013, Premier League club Liverpool agreed an £8.5 million transfer fee with Inter Milan for Coutinho, pending a medical exam and a work permit from the Home Office. Mauricio Pochettino's Southampton had also expressed an interest but Coutinho said he would prefer to join Liverpool. On 30 January, Liverpool confirmed the signing of Coutinho on a long-term contract and he was given the number 10 shirt. The former director of football at Liverpool, Damien Comolli, later revealed Liverpool had scouted and ultimately signed Coutinho following a recommendation by then-Inter Milan manager and former Liverpool manager Rafael Benítez, who said the Brazilian would be "world class".
2012–13
Coutinho made his Liverpool debut on 11 February 2013, replacing Stewart Downing in the 77th minute of a 2–0 defeat against West Bromwich Albion at Anfield. On 17 February, he scored his first goal for Liverpool on his full debut in a 5–0 victory over Swansea City. On 2 March, he set up Liverpool's first and second goals in a 4–0 win over Wigan Athletic and followed on with a goal in a 3–1 away loss to Southampton and another assist in a 2–1 away win against Aston Villa. He was Liverpool's Player of the Month for March.
Towards the end of the following month, he was named man of the match for his performance in Liverpool's 6–0 away victory over Newcastle United, claiming two assists and winning the free kick from which Jordan Henderson scored Liverpool's sixth goal. Coutinho then scored Liverpool's final goal of the season against Queens Park Rangers in Jamie Carragher's final match for the club, executing a driven shot from 30 yards out after being played in by Jordon Ibe. He ended his debut season with Liverpool with a return of 3 goals in 13 Premier League appearances.
2013–14
Coutinho began the 2013–14 season well before injuring his shoulder in a 2–2 match against Swansea City on 16 September 2013. He was restored to the starting line-up for the 4–0 victory over Fulham at Anfield on 9 November. On 23 November, Coutinho scored the opening goal against Everton in the Merseyside derby in the first minute of the game. Coutinho created his first assist of the season with a corner in the 5–1 thrashing of Norwich City at Anfield. On 26 December, he scored the Reds' only goal in a 2–1 defeat to Manchester City at the Etihad Stadium. On 30 March, Coutinho scored the third goal in a 4–0 victory over Tottenham Hotspur at Anfield.
On 13 April 2014, Coutinho scored the winning goal in the 78th minute in a 3–2 win against Manchester City. The result put Liverpool seven points ahead of Manchester City at the top of the Premier League table with four matches remaining. However, Manchester City had six matches remaining and went on to win the title, with Liverpool finishing second.
During the season, Coutinho mainly played in central midfield and earned praise due to his long and accurate passing from midfield, dribbling skills and creative play to set up strikers Luis Suárez and Daniel Sturridge.
Coutinho made 37 appearances and scored 5 goals for Liverpool in all competitions during the 2013–14 season.
2014–15
On 17 August 2014, Coutinho started in Liverpool's first match of the 2014–15 season, a 2–1 win against Southampton at Anfield. He created his first assist of the season in a 2–1 win against Swansea City in the fourth round of the League Cup, where he supplied the ball for Dejan Lovren to head the winning goal.
Coutinho scored his first goal of the season in a 3–2 away win against Queens Park Rangers on 19 October after coming off the substitutes' bench. On 21 December, Coutinho scored Liverpool's first goal in a 2–2 draw against Arsenal at Anfield.
On 31 January 2015, Coutinho assisted both goals for Raheem Sterling and Daniel Sturridge in a 2–0 win over West Ham United. On 3 February 2015, Coutinho signed a new long-term deal set to keep him at Liverpool until 2020. On 4 February, just one day after extending his contract, he scored the winning goal in a 2–1 FA Cup fourth round match against Bolton Wanderers. On 22 February, he scored the opening goal in Liverpool's 2–0 victory over Southampton. In the next match, against Manchester City on 1 March, Coutinho scored the winning goal for Liverpool. He won the PFA Fans' Player of the Month award for February.
On 8 April, Coutinho scored the winning goal in the 1–0 FA Cup sixth round replay win against Blackburn Rovers at Ewood Park after slotting the ball into the bottom left corner of the net. Eleven days later, he scored past goalkeeper Shay Given in the FA Cup semi-final against Aston Villa at Wembley Stadium, although Villa won 2–1. On 26 April, Coutinho was the only Liverpool player named in the PFA Team of the Year. On 2 May, Coutinho scored the opening goal and provided the assist in the 87th minute for Steven Gerrard's winner in a 2–1 win over Queens Park Rangers. Seventeen days later, he was named the team's Player of the Season. At the end of the season, he was shortlisted for the PFA Players' Player of the Year and the PFA Young Player of the Year, ultimately losing to Eden Hazard and Harry Kane, respectively.
2015–16
On 9 August 2015, Coutinho scored the winning goal in the 86th minute with a bending 25-yard strike in Liverpool's first match of the Premier League season, a 1–0 victory away to Stoke City. One week later, Liverpool won at home against AFC Bournemouth through Christian Benteke's goal, and the Premier League later confirmed the goal should not have counted as Coutinho was offside when it was scored. On 29 August, Coutinho was sent off in a 0–3 home defeat to West Ham United, being booked the first time for dissent and the second for a foul on Dimitri Payet. On 26 September, he assisted two goals in a 3–2 win over Aston Villa at Anfield. On 31 October, he scored his first Liverpool brace, scoring two long-range strikes to overturn a deficit and seal a 3–1 victory over Chelsea at Stamford Bridge. On 21 November, Coutinho scored in a 4–1 victory over Manchester City at the City of Manchester Stadium, the first time he had scored in three consecutive Premier League matches. He also assisted Roberto Firmino's first goal for Liverpool.
On 5 January 2016, Coutinho suffered a hamstring injury in a 1–0 win over Stoke City at the Britannia Stadium in the first leg of the League Cup semi-finals, which sidelined him for five weeks. On 9 February, he returned to score a goal to make it 1–1 against West Ham United in the FA Cup, although Liverpool lost in extra time. On 28 February, in the 2016 League Cup Final, Coutinho scored an 83rd-minute equalizer in a 1–1 draw against Manchester City. However, in the subsequent penalty shootout, his "hesitant" attempt was one of three saved by victorious City goalkeeper Willy Caballero. On 17 March, Coutinho scored Liverpool's goal in a 1–1 draw with Manchester United at Old Trafford, helping Liverpool to a 3–1 aggregate victory to progress to the quarter-finals of the UEFA Europa League. On 14 April, he scored as Liverpool defeated Borussia Dortmund 4–3 in the second leg of their quarter-final. On 13 April, Coutinho was one of six players nominated for the 2016 PFA Young Player of the Year award. On 21 April, he scored the final goal of a 4–0 Merseyside derby win over Everton.
2016–17
On 14 August 2016, Coutinho scored twice in Liverpool's Premier League season opener in a 4–3 win against Arsenal. His first goal was a curling 30-yard free kick to equalize at the end of the first half. He assisted Dejan Lovren's opener against Chelsea in an eventual 2–1 win. He also scored a goal and provided an assist against Hull City and was voted man of the match. After this match, he did not register any goals or assists for two games. He was voted man of the match for three successive matches for Liverpool against West Bromwich Albion, Crystal Palace and Watford. After 11 league matches, Liverpool reached the top of the table for the first time since May 2014, with Coutinho having played an important role.
On 26 November, Coutinho suffered ankle ligament damage in the first half of a 2–0 win against Sunderland. He missed six weeks, returning to action on 11 January against Southampton in the EFL Cup first leg.
In January, Coutinho signed a new five-year contract with no release clause with Liverpool which would keep him at the club until 2022. He then was named man of the match in his performance in the 3–1 Merseyside victory over Everton after scoring and assisting a goal. Coutinho became the leading Brazilian goalscorer in Premier League history after scoring his 30th Premier League goal in a win against Stoke City, overtaking Juninho.
2017–18
In August 2017, Liverpool rejected a £72 million bid from Barcelona for Coutinho, prompting the player to submit a transfer request over email. Two more improved bids from Barcelona were rejected, leading Barça director Albert Soler to claim Liverpool wanted £183 million for Coutinho, which Liverpool denied. Coutinho made his first appearance of the season for Liverpool on 13 September 2017, coming on as a substitute for Emre Can in the 75th minute of a 2–2 draw against Sevilla in the UEFA Champions League. He scored his first Premier League goal of the season on 23 September 2017 in a 3–2 victory at Leicester City.
On 6 December, Coutinho captained Liverpool for the first time in the absence of Jordan Henderson and scored his first hat-trick for the club in a 7–0 win against Spartak Moscow in the final group stage match of the season's Champions League. His second, a tap-in from Roberto Firmino's pass, was his 50th career goal for the Reds in all competitions. Coutinho had previously also netted in Liverpool's 7–0 victory over Maribor, which was the club's joint-largest ever away win in the competition, and largest away win by an English club. Later that month, he opened the scoring in a 4–0 win over AFC Bournemouth as Liverpool become the first team in Premier League history to win four consecutive league matches by at least a three-goal margin. On 26 December, he captained Liverpool in his 200th appearance for the club, scoring once and providing an assist in a 5–0 league win over Swansea City to score his third goal in as many league matches.
Coutinho played what transpired to be his final match for Liverpool on 30 December 2017, featuring prominently in a 2–1 league win against Leicester City at Anfield. On 31 December, sportswear company Nike—Coutinho and Barcelona's sponsor—advertised Coutinho's image on the back of a Barcelona shirt, despite Coutinho still being a Liverpool player at the time. Coutinho was omitted from the Liverpool squad to face Burnley on New Year's Day with a minor thigh injury. He left Liverpool having registered 12 goals and 9 assists in 20 appearances for the club in 2017–18.
Liverpool chairman Tom Werner said "I only have good things to say about Philippe, but I think he left Liverpool because he wanted to play for one of the two big Spanish clubs. We tried to convince him that we had the club moving in the right direction and that he could experience great nights in the Champions League if he stayed in Liverpool". An article in Metro said that Coutinho "lost a lot of support for the manner in which he forced through a move to Barcelona".
Barcelona
On 6 January 2018, Liverpool confirmed they had reached an agreement with La Liga club Barcelona for the transfer of Coutinho. His transfer fee was reported to be an initial £105 million rising to £142 million with various clauses being met. During his medical, he was diagnosed with a thigh injury sustained a few days before joining Barcelona, meaning that he would be out for three weeks.
Coutinho made his debut for Barcelona on 25 January 2018, in a 2–0 (2–1 on aggregate) win against his former club Espanyol in the quarter-finals of the Copa del Rey, coming on as a 68th-minute substitute for captain Andrés Iniesta. Assisted by his former Liverpool teammate Luis Suárez, Coutinho scored his first Barcelona goal on 8 February 2018 against Valencia in the second leg of the Copa del Rey semi-finals just four minutes after coming on as a half-time substitute.
2018–19
On 28 October 2018, Coutinho scored a curtain-raising goal, his first Clásico goal, in a 5–1 win against Real Madrid. He scored his first Champions League goal with Barcelona on 4 October 2018 in a 4–2 away win against Tottenham Hotspur. On 16 April 2019, Coutinho scored a goal in a 3–0 win over Manchester United in the Champions League quarter-finals, then he celebrated by putting his fingers in his ears and closing his eyes in response to recent criticism from fans. Former Barcelona player Rivaldo commented on the incident, saying: "It was not a good gesture. He scored a great goal, but it's never good to do something like that to the fans", then he added, "The supporters criticise him because they know he has to give more. I don't know what happened to him during the week, what he read in the newspapers or saw on television, but you have to keep working, think about the next game and score goals. If he scores everything will change and he will be a player for the club."
However, he eventually won his second La Liga title with Barcelona, in which he played 54 matches in all competitions, scoring 11 goals.
2019–20: Loan to Bayern Munich
On 19 August 2019, Coutinho joined German club Bayern Munich on a season-long loan. Bayern paid a loan fee of €8.5 million plus Coutinho's wages. Bayern reportedly had the option to sign Coutinho on a permanent contract in the summer of 2020 for €120 million. On 24 August, Coutinho made his Bundesliga debut for Bayern in a 3–0 win at Schalke. Coutinho came on as a 57th minute substitute. On 21 September, Coutinho scored his first goal for Bayern in a 4–0 win against 1. FC Köln. Coutinho said in a press conference that he was happy at Bayern Munich and intended to stay there. On 14 December, Coutinho scored his first hat-trick for Bayern Munich, also assisting two goals, in a 6–1 win over SV Werder Bremen. On 14 August, Coutinho came on in the second half of their Champions League quarter-final match against his parent club Barcelona, assisting Robert Lewandowski in the 82nd minute for the 6th goal and scoring the last 2 goals at 85th and 89th minutes to complete the 8–2 routing. Coutinho came on as a substitute in the Champions League Final, in which Bayern Munich managed to win 1–0 over Paris Saint-Germain, to be their second treble of Bundesliga, DFB-Pokal and Champions League titles.
2020–21
Coutinho returned to Barcelona with the arrival of new coach Ronald Koeman. On 4 October 2020, he scored his first goal of the season in a 1–1 draw against Sevilla. On 29 December 2020, he suffered a knee injury in a 1–1 draw against Eibar and missed the remainder of the season.
2021–22: Loan to Aston Villa
On 7 January 2022, Coutinho joined English club Aston Villa on a loan for the remainder of the season, reuniting with former Liverpool teammate Steven Gerrard, Aston Villa's manager. On 15 January, he made his debut coming on for Morgan Sanson as a 70th minute substitute against Manchester United, scoring the equalizer in a 2–2 home draw in the Premier League.
Aston Villa
On 12 May 2022, at Villa's End of Season Awards, Chief Executive Christian Purslow announced that they had signed Coutinho on a permanent deal for an undisclosed fee, reported to be £17 million, with the player committing to a contract until 2026.
International career
Having made youth appearances for Brazil from the under-14 team upwards, Coutinho became a key player in the Brazilian squad that won the 2009 South American Under-17 Football Championship, scoring three goals.
Coutinho made his first senior appearance in a Brazil shirt on 7 October 2010, starting in a friendly match against Iran. He was omitted from the final squad for the 2014 FIFA World Cup in Brazil by manager Luiz Felipe Scolari. On 19 August 2014, Coutinho was called up to the national squad by new Brazil manager Dunga for the friendly matches against Colombia and Ecuador in September, and played the final 25 minutes of the match against Ecuador. On 29 March 2015, he was selected to start in Brazil's 1–0 friendly victory over Chile in London. On 5 May 2015, Coutinho was included in Brazil's squad for the 2015 Copa América, and he scored his first international goal on 7 June during a 2–0 friendly win over Mexico at Allianz Parque.
In May 2016, Coutinho was included by Dunga in Brazil's 23-man squad for the Copa América Centenario in the United States. On 8 June, in the second group match at the Camping World Stadium he scored a hat-trick in a 7–1 win against Haiti. Brazil did not advance past the group stage after losing 0–1 to Peru. On 28 March 2017, Coutinho scored in a 3–0 win against Paraguay that ensured Brazil's 2018 FIFA World Cup qualification.
In May 2018, Coutinho was named in the squad for the 2018 FIFA World Cup in Russia. On 17 June 2018, he scored in his FIFA World Cup debut with a curtain-raising, trademark right-footed curling shot from outside the penalty area into the corner of the goal in Brazil's 1–1 draw with Switzerland in their opening match at the World Cup. In the following match against Costa Rica on 22 June, he scored the opening goal in injury time of the second half and was named man of the match as Brazil won 2–0. On 6 July, he assisted Renato Augusto's goal in a 1–2 quarter-final defeat to Belgium as Brazil were eliminated from the World Cup.
In May 2019, Coutinho was included in Brazil's 23-man squad for the 2019 Copa América. He earned his 50th cap for his nation in the tournament's opening match on 14 June, and netted twice in a 3–0 win over Bolivia.
On 7 April 2021, Brazil confirmed that Coutinho would miss the 2021 Copa América due to a knee injury sustained earlier that season. After going through 2021 without making an international appearance, Coutinho returned to the national side's line-up for World Cup qualifiers in early 2022, scoring against Paraguay and Chile. On 6 November, however, it was announced that he had suffered a muscular injury that would rule him out of the final tournament.
Style of play
Considered to be an archetypal Brazilian number 10 advanced playmaker, Coutinho has been used as an attacking midfielder, second striker, as a central midfielder in a number 8 role, and even as a wide attacking midfielder on the flanks, where he excels at providing assists for teammates.
Due to his dribbling ability, pace and agility, he has been compared to Lionel Messi and Ronaldinho by his former Espanyol manager Mauricio Pochettino, who also said, "Philippe... he has a special magic in his feet." Former Brazilian striker Careca has also compared Coutinho to Zico due to his creativity, and was highly praised by his Liverpool teammates.
Coutinho's elite vision and passing ability earned him the nickname "Little Magician" by Liverpool fans and his precocious ability has also led his team's supporters to give him the nickname "The Kid". Although naturally right-footed, Coutinho is capable of playing with both feet and can strike the ball particularly well from distance. He has a penchant for scoring from spectacular curling shots with his right foot from just outside or well outside the penalty area, especially after cutting inside from the left flank, and placing the ball into the top corner of the goal, which has led his former Liverpool manager Jürgen Klopp to compare him to Alessandro Del Piero. He is also a highly accurate free kick taker.
Sponsorship
Coutinho is sponsored by sportswear company Nike. He wears Nike Phantom Vision boots. Coutinho appears on the cover of Pro Evolution Soccer 2019.
Personal life
When Coutinho moved to Italy at age 18 to join Inter Milan, he was joined there by his parents and his girlfriend Ainê, whom he had first met at a friend's party. On moving to Espanyol, his parents returned to Brazil. He married Ainê in the summer of 2012 in Brazil. The couple have two daughters and one son. He has tattoos down his arms which form tributes to his family and his wife.
Coutinho is a devout Christian.
During the early morning hours of 20 February 2018, Coutinho found his Barcelona home burgled. He had been out eating dinner with his family, and he was having construction work done on his house, which made it easier for burglars to break in.
In August 2018, Coutinho gained a Portuguese passport through his wife, no longer making him a non-EU player.
Career statistics
Club
International
Honours
Vasco da Gama
Inter Milan
Barcelona
Liverpool
Bayern Munich
Brazil U17
Brazil U20
Brazil
Individual