Predators (film)
Predators is a 2010 American science fiction action film directed by Nimród Antal, written by Alex Litvak and Michael Finch and starring Adrien Brody, Topher Grace, Alice Braga, Walton Goggins, and Laurence Fishburne. It was distributed by 20th Century Fox. It is the third installment of the Predator franchise. The film follows an ensemble cast of characters including Royce (Adrien Brody), a mercenary who appears in an unidentified jungle among other proficient killers. They find that they have been abducted and placed on a planet that acts as a game reserve for two warring tribes of extraterrestrial killers, and actively look for a way to return to Earth.
Producer Robert Rodriguez had developed a script for a third installment as early as 1994, although it was not until 2009 that 20th Century Fox greenlit the project. According to Rodriguez, the title Predators is an allusion to the second film in the Alien franchise, Aliens (1986). The title also has a double meaning, referring both to the extraterrestrial Predator creatures and to the group of human characters who are pitted against them. Principal photography for Predators began on September 28, 2009, and concluded after 53 days; filming took place in Hawaii and then in Austin, Texas.
Predators was released in the United States on July 9, 2010. It grossed $127 million worldwide and received mixed reviews from critics, with praise for the action but criticism aimed at the thinly written characters. A fourth film, titled The Predator, was released in 2018, and a prequel, Prey, in 2022.
Plot
Royce awakens to find himself free falling into an unfamiliar jungle, and meets several others who arrive in the same manner: Los Zetas cartel enforcer Cuchillo, Spetsnaz soldier Nikolai, IDF sniper Isabelle, RUF officer Mombasa, San Quentin death row inmate Stans, Yakuza member Hanzo, and physician Edwin. The group follows Royce, whom Isabelle suspects is a former black operations soldier turned mercenary. In the jungle, they find a strange monument, empty cages, and deadfall traps set by a deceased Green Beret. Reaching the higher ground, they find themselves staring at an alien sky and realize they are not on Earth.
The party survives an attack from a pack of quadruped alien beasts. Royce deduces they are on a planet used as a game preserve, where humans and other species are hunted. Cuchillo is killed, and his body is used to lure the survivors into a trap, which they avoid. The group follows the beasts' tracks to a camp and finds a captive Predator. Their hunters, three larger Predators known as the Tracker, Berserker and Falconer, attack the group. Mombasa is killed, and the rest of the group escapes. Isabelle recognizes the Predator as matching the description of a similar creature that killed a special operations team in 1987 in Guatemala, but was defeated by a single survivor.
The group encounters Ronald Noland, a solitary U.S. Air Cavalry soldier, who has survived on the planet for "ten seasons" by hiding and scavenging from the Predators and their victims. He takes the group to his hideout and explains that the Predators hunt in threes, sharpening their killing skills by abducting worthy prey from other worlds and bringing them to the planet. Noland also reveals that there is a blood feud between the Predators. Royce devises a plan to free the Predator being held prisoner, hoping it will take them home.
Noland traps the others and attempts to use smoke to suffocate them. Having gone mad, he plans to kill them for their equipment. Royce uses an explosive to attract the Predators to the hideout. Noland is killed by the Tracker, who releases the group. In the ensuing chase, Nikolai uses two claymore mines to kill the Tracker, sacrificing himself. The remaining group is intercepted by the Berserker. Stans distracts it by attacking it with his shiv, allowing the others to escape before being killed. Hanzo stays behind to duel the Falconer with a katana, killing it before dying from his wounds.
Royce, Isabelle, and Edwin continue to head for the Predators' camp, hoping to enact Royce's plan, until Edwin is injured by a trap. When Isabelle refuses to abandon him, Royce leaves them both behind. They are caught by the Berserker, who traps them in a pit and continues to the camp. Royce frees the captive Predator in exchange for transport to Earth. The Predator dons his armor and activates the ship using his wrist computer, setting a course for Earth. Royce runs to the ship as the Berserker arrives, and the two Predators fight each other. The Berserker overpowers and decapitates the other Predator before using his wrist computer to self-destruct the ship, ostensibly killing Royce. Edwin paralyzes Isabelle using the neurotoxic poison from a plant he found earlier; he reveals he is a serial killer and intends to stay on the planet. Royce appears and stabs Edwin with his scalpel, paralyzing him.
Royce booby traps Edwin with grenades, using him as bait to injure the remaining Predator. While Isabelle crawls for her sniper rifle, Royce fights the Berserker with an axe. Isabelle shoots the Predator and Royce decapitates it. As Royce and Isabelle rest, they observe parachutes opening in the distant sky. Surmising that more Predators will arrive to hunt the new prey, Royce and Isabelle head into the jungle.
Cast
The four Predators in the film are portrayed by Derek Mears, Carey Jones, and Brian Steele. The Predators are identified in the film's credits as the "Classic Predator", "Tracker Predator", "Falconer Predator", and "Berserker Predator". Mears plays the Classic Predator, designed to resemble the creature in the original film. Steele plays the Berserker and Falconer Predators, two of the larger Predators hunting the humans. The Berserker Predator is identified by a xenomorph mandible attached to its helmet and faces off against Royce in the film's climax, while the Falconer Predator controls a flying reconnaissance drone and is killed by Hanzo. Jones plays the Tracker Predator, identified by a pair of tusks attached to its helmet, which controls the quadrupedal hunting animals and is killed by Nikolai. Jones also doubled for Steele in some scenes as the Berserker and Falconer Predators.
Production
Development
The film was produced by Robert Rodriguez and written by Alex Litvak and Michael Finch. In 1994, Rodriguez wrote an early script for a third Predator film for 20th Century Fox while he was working on Desperado at the time. Rodriguez presented the script to the studio, but was denied when they realized that the budget would be too large. Fifteen years later, the studio decided to go with his script. Rodriguez stated:
In 2009, 20th Century Fox studio executive, Alex Young, called Rodriguez to consider using his treatment to revive the individual Predator franchise. The film was produced at Rodriguez's Troublemaker Studios as opposed to 20th Century Fox so that Rodriguez had more creative control over the film. It was originally thought that Rodriguez would direct, but on July 1, 2009, Nimród Antal was officially signed on to direct.
Rodriguez and Antal originally said they wanted the film to be a sequel only to the original Predator as the film is trying to distance itself from Predator 2 and the first two Alien vs. Predator films.
Casting
At the 2009 San Diego Comic-Con International Rodriguez stated that Predators would feature an ensemble cast, and that the most important element of the film would be "great characters so that the audience feels they're going on this journey with them". He also noted that the title had a double meaning, referring not only to the extraterrestrial hunters but also to the human characters, all of whom are dangerous killers. He and Antal wanted each of the characters to be well-developed enough to be able to stand alone. Rodriguez hoped to have Arnold Schwarzenegger play a cameo role as Dutch, his character from the original Predator film, but this ultimately did not happen.
Filming
The film was shot on a 53-day schedule. Exterior filming location was mostly set in Kolekole, Hawaii. Filming started on September 28, 2009. The film wrapped up its 22-day shoot on the Hawaii location on November 1, 2009. The film shot its interior set scenes at Robert Rodriguez's studio in Austin, Texas. Sixty percent of the film was shot in Texas in order to be eligible for a tax benefit. The film shot more exterior footage at Canyon Lake Gorge in Comal County and Hamilton Pool Preserve.
Special effects

Tom Woodruff Jr. and Alec Gillis, head of special effects studio Amalgamated Dynamics, Inc. (ADI), who previously worked on 2004's Alien vs. Predator and 2007's Aliens vs. Predator: Requiem, did not return for the creature design of Predators, nor did Stan Winston Studios. Instead, KNB EFX's Howard Berger and Greg Nicotero took over building the creature suits. Berger, who worked with Winston on the original Predator, stated that the studio is reprising the original Stan Winston design of the Predator in the film, saying "We wanted to have the Predator look as it did in the original film. We went back and looked at the original … everyone's going to be very happy that we've been very faithful to the Stan Winston designs."
In addition to the original Predator designs, the film features many new creatures never before seen in a Predator film, such as a new breed of Predators that belong to a different tribe, alien creatures that have been domesticated by the Predators for use in hunting, and other alien creatures that have been brought to the planet by the Predators to be used as prey.
Music
There had been speculation that original Predator composer Alan Silvestri would return to do the score, but on February 26, 2010, it was announced that John Debney, who worked with Rodriguez on such films as Spy Kids and Sin City, would compose the original score for the film.
Rodriguez shared his thoughts on how the score should play out saying:
Debney recorded many custom sounds and instruments, including Tibetan long horns to create squeals and screams. He also manipulated metal scrapes and ethnic percussion to further highlight the advanced yet brutal and primitive quality of the Predators and their world. Debney also put up a sneak-peek of one of the Predators scoring sessions.
La-La Land Records released the original score for the film on July 5, 2010. The song "Long Tall Sally" by Little Richard plays during the credits; it was also used in the original Predator film.
Release
Theatrical
It was announced on March 3, 2010, that Robert Rodriguez and Nimród Antal would reveal a "first look" at Predators at the SXSW Film Festival in Austin, Texas on March 12, at 10:15pm. Rodriguez expressed his excitement about the event, saying, "My director Nimród Antal and I are excited to bring this first look at Predators to Austin's SXSW Film Festival, an event that's become vital to the filmmaking scene. Austin is my home and I'm proud that Predators was conceived and filmed here."
Home media
Predators was released on DVD and Blu-ray formats on October 19, 2010. Both releases include commentary tracks by Robert Rodriguez and Nimród Antal, motion comics, and behind-the-scenes-features. The Blu-ray edition includes additional behind-the-scenes features as well as deleted and extended scenes.
Reception
Box office

Released on July 9, 2010, in the United States, Predators opened with $10 million on Friday. The film finished third at the box office with $24.8 million during its first weekend, behind Despicable Me and The Twilight Saga: Eclipse. The film was released internationally on July 8, 2010 and had its biggest success in the markets of the UK and Ireland with $6.8 million and Japan with $6.3 million. The film has grossed $52 million in the United States and $75.2 million internationally, for a worldwide total of $127.2 million.
Critical response

Review aggregate website Rotten Tomatoes reports that 65% of 205 critics gave the film a positive review, with an average rating of 5.8/10. The site's critical consensus reads: "After a string of subpar sequels, this bloody, action-packed reboot takes the Predator franchise back to its testosterone-fueled roots." Another review aggregation website Metacritic assigned the film a weighted average score of 51 out of 100, based on 30 critics, indicating "mixed or average reviews". Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "C+" on an A+ to F scale.
A. O. Scott of The New York Times said, "Antal is a good enough action director that some of the combat is pretty exciting." On the other hand, Michael Phillips of the Chicago Tribune wrote, "When the story relocates to the Fishburne character's grimy, claustrophobic domicile, the movie turns static. The filmmakers may have been going for an Alien industrial-grunge vibe, but the tension just isn't sufficient."
The primary complaint leveled against the film is the failure, as film critic Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun-Times described, of the cast to capture the "quiet suspense" of the original Predator film.
Chris Nashawaty of Entertainment Weekly complained that the film's characters were more like "cardboard clichés lining up for the body count" than real action heroes.
Lou Lumenick of the New York Post gave the film a positive review by stating that, "After 23 years and three attempts, Predators finally delivers a solid sequel to the Arnold Schwarzenegger B-movie classic." He added that, "It's not exactly hard to predict who the survivors will be at the end of Predators, but it's a fun ride."
Other media
Sequel
Nimród Antal had talked about a direct sequel to Predators and said he would love to do one. Rodriguez has said that he has interest in a sequel because of the large number of potential ideas the Predator planet setting provides:
In 2010, Rodriguez confirmed that there would eventually be a Predators sequel:
Adrien Brody also spoke about reprising his role in a possible sequel:
In June 2014, Fox announced plans for a new film, with Shane Black co-writing and directing, Fred Dekker co-writing and John Davis producing (without the involvement of Rodriguez). At the time, Black said the film is a sequel, rather than a reboot, while Davis said the film would "reinvent the franchise". It was explained that since the plot takes place on Earth, the story will be more closely linked to the first two films; while the film acknowledges the events of Predator and Predator 2, but before the events of Predators.
Comic books
A four issue tie-in Predators comic book by Dark Horse Comics was released weekly from June 9 to June 30 to promote the release of the film. The comic series, consisting of two storylines titled "Welcome to the Jungle" and "A Predatory Life", serves as a prequel to the events depicted in the film. On July 14, a 72-page one-shot adaptation of the film was released, showing more back story of the characters Royce and Isabelle than is depicted in the film. On the same day a one-shot sequel comic titled "Preserve the Game" was also released, depicting the further adventures of Royce and Isabelle two months after the events of the film.
Toys
In July 2010, NECA released the Classic Predator, Falconer Predator, and Berserker Predator action figures. NECA later released a second series of figures in December, consisting of a masked Classic Predator, an unmasked Berserker Predator, and the Tracker Predator. The Predator hound was released in March 2011. Hot Toys and Sideshow Collectibles have also created props, maquettes and figures for the film.
Video games
Downloadable games publisher Chillingo secured a licensing agreement with Fox Digital Entertainment to publish the official Predators video game for the iPhone, iPod Touch and iPad through Apple's App Store. The game was developed by independent game developer Angry Mob Games and was released on July 1, 2010, a week before the film's theatrical release. The game was later ported to Android and published by Fox Digital Entertainment in 2012.