Premenstrual syndrome
Premenstrual syndrome (PMS) refers to emotional and physical symptoms that regularly occur in the one to two weeks before the start of each menstrual period. Symptoms  resolve around the time menstrual bleeding begins. Different women experience different symptoms. Premenstrual syndrome is commonly noted by at least one physical, emotional, or behavioral symptom, that resolves with menses. The range of symptoms is wide, and most commonly are breast tenderness, bloating, headache, mood swings, depression, anxiety, anger, and irritability. They must interfere with daily living, during two menstrual cycles of prospective recording. These symptoms are nonspecific and may be seen in women without PMS. Often PMS-related symptoms are present for about six days. An individual's pattern of symptoms may change over time. Symptoms do not occur during pregnancy or following menopause.
Diagnosis requires a consistent pattern of emotional and physical symptoms occurring after ovulation and before menstruation to a degree that interferes with normal life. Emotional symptoms must not be present during the initial part of the menstrual cycle. A daily list of symptoms over a few months may help in diagnosis. Other disorders that cause similar symptoms need to be excluded before a diagnosis is made.
The cause of PMS is unknown, but the underlying mechanism is believed to involve changes in hormone levels. Reducing salt, alcohol, caffeine, and stress along with increasing exercise is typically all that is recommended in those with mild symptoms. Calcium and vitamin D supplementation may be useful in some. Anti-inflammatory drugs such as ibuprofen or naproxen may help with physical symptoms. In those with more significant symptoms birth control pills or the diuretic spironolactone may be useful.
Over 90% of women report having some premenstrual symptoms, such as bloating, headaches, and moodiness. Premenstrual symptoms generally do not cause substantial disruption, and qualify as PMS in approximately 20 to 30% of pre-menopausal women. Antidepressants of the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors class may be used to treat the emotional symptoms of PMS.
Premenstrual dysphoric disorder (PMDD) is a more severe form of PMS that has greater psychological symptoms. PMDD affects less than 5% of women of child-bearing age.
Signs and symptoms
More than 200 different symptoms have been associated with PMS. Common emotional and non-specific symptoms include stress, anxiety, difficulty with sleep, headache, feeling tired, mood swings, increased emotional sensitivity, and changes in interest in sex. Problems with concentration and memory may occur. There may also be depression or anxiety.
Common physical symptoms include bloating, breast tenderness, and headache.
The exact symptoms and their intensity vary significantly from person to person, and even somewhat from cycle to cycle and over time. Most people with premenstrual syndrome experience only a few of the possible symptoms, in a relatively predictable pattern.
Premenstrual dysphoric disorder (PMDD) is a severe form of PMS that affects less than 5% of women of child-bearing age.
Causes
While PMS is linked to the luteal phase, the causes of PMS are not clear, but several factors may be involved. Changes in hormones during the menstrual cycle seem to be an important factor, with changing hormone levels affecting some more than others. PMS occurs more often in those who are in their late 20s and early 40s, have at least one child, have a family history of depression, and have a past medical history of either postpartum depression or a mood disorder.
Diagnosis
There are no laboratory tests or unique physical findings to verify the diagnosis of PMS. The key features are:
PMS is common, and more severe symptoms that interfere with daily life would qualify as PMDD. PMS is not listed in the DSM-IV, unlike PMDD. To document a pattern and determine if it is PMDD, potentially affected women may keep a prospective record of their symptoms on a calendar for at least two menstrual cycles. This will help to establish if the symptoms are, indeed, limited to the premenstrual time, predictably recurring, and disruptive to normal functioning.  A number of standardized instruments have been developed to describe PMS, including the Calendar of Premenstrual syndrome Experiences (COPE), the Prospective Record of the Impact and Severity of Menstruation (PRISM), and the Visual Analogue Scales (VAS).Other conditions that may better explain symptoms must be excluded.
A number of pre-existing medical conditions may be made worse at menstruation. This is known as menstrual, or premenstrual magnification. These conditions may lead women who do not have PMS to incorrectly believe that they have PMS, when the underlying disorder is some other medical problem, such as anemia, hypothyroidism, eating disorders and substance abuse.  A key feature is that these conditions may also be present outside of the luteal phase. Conditions that can be magnified perimenstrually include depression or other affective disorders, migraine, seizure disorders, fatigue, irritable bowel syndrome, asthma, and allergies. Problems with other aspects of the female reproductive system must be excluded, including dysmenorrhea (period pain during menstruation, rather than before it), endometriosis, perimenopause, and adverse effects produced by oral contraceptive pills.
The National Institute of Mental Health research definition compares the intensity of symptoms from cycle days 5 to 10 to the six-day interval before the onset of the menstrual period.  To qualify as PMS, symptom intensity must increase at least 30% in the six days before menstruation.  Additionally, this pattern must be documented for at least two consecutive cycles.
Management
Many treatments have been tried in PMS. Reducing salt, caffeine, and stress along with increasing exercise is typically all that is recommended in those with mild symptoms. Calcium and vitamin D supplementation may be useful in some. Anti-inflammatories such as naproxen may help with physical symptoms.  A healthy diet, reduced consumption of salt, caffeine and alcohol, and regular exercise may be effective for women in controlling water retention. In those with more significant symptoms birth control pills may be useful.
Diuretics have been used to handle water retention. Spironolactone has been shown in some studies to be useful.
Antidepressants
Antidepressants in particular SSRIs are used as the first-line treatment of severe symptoms of PMS, and also in treating PMDD.  Those with PMS may be able to take medication only on the days when symptoms are expected to occur.  Although intermittent therapy might be more acceptable to some, this might be less effective than continuous regimens. Side effect such as nausea and weakness are however relatively common.
Hormonal medications
Hormonal contraception is commonly used; common forms include the combined oral contraceptive pill and the contraceptive patch.  This class of medication may cause PMS-related symptoms in some and may reduce physical symptoms in others.  They do not relieve emotional symptoms.
Progesterone support has been used for many years but evidence of its efficacy is inadequate.
Gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonists can be useful in severe forms of PMS but have their own set of significant potential side effects.
Alternative medicine
Tentative evidence supports vitamin B6 and chasteberry. Data are insufficient to determine an effect of St. John's wort, soy, vitamin E, and saffron. Evening primrose oil may be useful.
There is tentative evidence that acupressure and acupuncture may help to reduce PMS symptoms and improve women' quality of life.
Prognosis
PMS is generally a stable diagnosis, with susceptible individuals experiencing the same symptoms at the same intensity near the end of each cycle for years. Treatment for specific symptoms is usually effective.
Even without treatment, symptoms tend to decrease in perimenopausal women.  However, those who experience PMS or PMDD are more likely to have significant symptoms associated with menopause, such as hot flashes.
Epidemiology
Over 90% of women report having some premenstrual symptoms, such as bloating, headaches, and moodiness. Mostly the symptoms are mild.
About 20 to 50% of women of reproductive age have PMS, and less than 5% have the severe form called premenstrual dysphoric disorder (PMDD) that affects daily living.
Among females of reproductive age living in India, the prevalence of PMS is 43%, and in adolescents is even higher at almost 50%.
History
PMS was originally seen as an imagined disease. Women who reported its symptoms were often told it was "all in their head". Woman's reproductive organs were thought to have complete control over them. Women were warned not to divert needed energy away from the uterus and ovaries. This view of limited energy very quickly ran up against a reality in 19th century America that young girls worked extremely long and hard hours in factories; newspapers in the 19th century were peppered with remedies to help in the "tyrannous processes" of the menstrual cycle. In 1873 Edward Clarke published an influential book titled Sex in Education. Clarke came to the conclusion that female operatives suffer less than schoolgirls because they "work their brain less". This suggested that they have stronger bodies and a reproductive "apparatus more normally constructed". Feminists later took opposition to Clarke's argument that women should not leave the private sphere by showing that women could function in the world outside the home in spite of natural body functions.
The formal medical description of premenstrual syndrome (PMS) and the more severe, related diagnosis of premenstrual dysphoric disorder (PMDD) goes back at least 70 years to a paper presented at the New York Academy of Medicine by Robert T. Frank titled "Hormonal Causes of Premenstrual Tension". The specific term premenstrual syndrome appears to date from an article published in 1953 by Dalton and Greene in the British Medical Journal. Since then, PMS has been a continuous presence in popular culture, occupying a place that is larger than the research attention accorded it as a medical diagnosis. Some have argued that women are partially responsible for the medicalization of PMS.  They claim that women are partially responsible for legitimizing this disorder and have thus contributed to the social construction of PMS as an illness.  It has also been suggested that the public debate over PMS and PMDD was impacted by organizations who had a stake in the outcome including feminists, the American Psychiatric Association, physicians and scientists. Until the 1950s, there was little research done surrounding PMS and it was not seen as a social problem.  By the 1980s, however, viewing PMS in a social context had begun to take place.
Alternative views
Some supporters of PMS as a social construct believe PMDD and PMS to be unrelated issues: according to them, PMDD is a product of brain chemistry, and PMS is a product of a hypochondriatic culture, i.e. a culture-bound syndrome. Most studies on PMS and PMDD rely solely on self-reporting. According to social psychologist Carol Tavris, Western women are socially conditioned to expect PMS or to at least know of its existence, and they, therefore, report their symptoms accordingly. The anthropologist Emily Martin argues that PMS is a cultural phenomenon that continues to grow in a positive feedback loop, and thus is a social construction that contributes to learned helplessness or convenient excuse. Tavris says that PMS is blamed as an explanation for rage or sadness. The decision to call PMDD an illness has been criticized as inappropriate medicalization. In both cases, they are referring to the emotional aspects, not the normal physical symptoms that are present.