President of Moldova
The President of the Republic of Moldova (Romanian: Președintele Republicii Moldova) is the head of state of Moldova. The current president is Maia Sandu, who assumed office on 24 December 2020.
Duties and functions
The office of the presidency in Moldova is largely ceremonial, with most of the formal political power exercised by parliament and the prime minister. However, because the president represents Moldova internationally, they have sway over the country's relationships with other countries. In addition, the president can influence public policy by using their high profile to initiate and participate in public discourse.
A collection of organizational bodies collectively known as the Presidential Administration, whose members are appointed by the president, serves as the communication service between the government and the presidency. One office of the Administration, the Supreme Security Council, advises the president on foreign policy.
Election
The president is elected in a two-round direct election, with a runoff taking place between the top two finishers if no candidate receives a majority in the first round. This system was put in place when the constitution of Moldova was adopted in 1994.
In 2000, a law was passed changing the process to an indirect election by the Parliament of Moldova, with a supermajority of 61 votes required. On March 4, 2016, the Constitutional Court ruled that the law was unconstitutional and Moldova consequently returned to electing the president via popular vote.
One presidential term lasts for four years; presidents are limited to two terms.
Constitutional position
According to the Article 77 of the Constitution of Moldova (1994), the president of Moldova is the head of the state and represents the state and is the guarantor of national sovereignty, independence, and the unity and territorial integrity of the nation.
Acting president
The acting president of Moldova  (Romanian: Președinte interimar al Republicii Moldova) is a person who fulfils the duties of the president of Moldova when cases of incapacity and vacancy occur. It is a temporary post provided by the Constitution of Moldova.
According to Article 91 of the Constitution of Moldova (1994): 
Suspension from office
According to Article 89 of the Constitution of Moldova (1994): 
Vacancy
According to Article 90 of the Constitution of Moldova (1994): 
Standard
The presidential standard (Romanian: Stindardul Preşedintelui) consists of the Coat of Arms of Moldova in front of a purple background and a border composed of squares of 1/9 in the national colors of the republic. The regulations of the Standard of the President is approved by the decree of the President with the opinion of the National Heraldic Commission. The original of the Standard of the President is handed over to the President at the inauguration ceremony and is kept in their office. Duplicates and copies of the standard are displayed at the Presidential Palace or at other presidential residences while they are on these premises.
Band and music
The official march of the presidency is the Marș de Întîmpinare «La Mulți ani» (Slow March «To many years»), which is used during the arrival of the president at special occasions, similarly to Hail to the Chief for the President of the United States. The Presidential Band of the Republic of Moldova is the main military band of the Armed Forces of the Republic of Moldova and specifically serves the president during all functions of state. The band performs at welcome ceremonies of foreign officials on state visits, military parades, and the accreditation of ambassadors.
Office of the President
List of presidents of Moldova
Moldavian Democratic Republic (1917–1918)
  Bessarabian Peasants' Party
First secretaries of the Moldavian Communist Party
Chairman of the Supreme Soviet
  PCM
Republic of Moldova (1991–present)
  PDAM
  PCRM
  PL
  PLDM
  PDM
  PSRM
  PAS
  Independent
Residence
The Presidential Palace is located in the Buiucani sector of Chișinău. It was constructed between 1984 and 1987 to the design of architects A. Zalțman and V. Iavorski. The distinctive building was originally the meeting place of the Supreme Soviet of the Moldavian SSR.