Radiohead discography
The English rock band Radiohead have released nine studio albums, one live album, five compilation albums, one remix album, nine video albums, seven EPs, 33 singles and 48 music videos. Their debut album, Pablo Honey, released in February 1993, peaked at number 22 in the United Kingdom, receiving platinum certifications in the UK and US. Radiohead's debut single, "Creep", is their most successful, entering the top ten in several countries. Their second album, The Bends, released in March 1995, peaked at number four in the UK, where it was certified triple platinum.


OK Computer, Radiohead's third album, was released in May 1997. It became their most successful album, peaking at number one in the United Kingdom and Ireland and reaching the top ten in several other countries. It was certified triple platinum and produced the UK top-ten singles "Paranoid Android", "Karma Police" and "No Surprises". Kid A followed in October 2000, topping the charts in the UK and becoming first number-one Radiohead album on the United States Billboard 200. Amnesiac was released in May 2001, topping the UK charts and producing the singles "Pyramid Song" and "Knives Out". Hail to the Thief was released in June 2003, ending Radiohead's contract with EMI. It was Radiohead's fourth consecutive UK number-one album and was certified platinum.
Radiohead released their seventh album, In Rainbows, in October 2007 as a download for which customers could set their own price; a conventional retail release followed. It sold more than three million copies in one year. Two singles were released, including "Nude", Radiohead's first top-40 hit on the US Billboard Hot 100 since "Creep". Radiohead self-released their eighth album, The King of Limbs, in February 2011. It ended their streak of number-one albums in the UK, peaking at number seven, and is the only Radiohead album not to be certified gold in the US. In April 2016, following the purchase of EMI by Universal Music, Radiohead's back catalogue was transferred to XL Recordings, who had released the retail editions of In Rainbows and The King of Limbs. Radiohead self-released their ninth album, A Moon Shaped Pool, in May 2016, backed by the singles "Burn the Witch" and "Daydreaming".
In June 2017, Radiohead and XL released a 20th-anniversary OK Computer reissue, OK Computer OKNOTOK 1997 2017, including unreleased tracks, two of which were released as download singles: "I Promise" and "Man of War". In June 2019, several hours of recordings from the OK Computer period leaked online; in response, Radiohead made them available to purchase online as MiniDiscs [Hacked], with all proceeds to the environmentalist group Extinction Rebellion. Kid A Mnesia, an anniversary reissue compiling Kid A, Amnesiac and previously unreleased material, was released in November 2021; it was promoted with the singles "If You Say the Word" and "Follow Me Around".
Albums
Demo albums
Notes