Reputation (album)
Reputation (stylized in all lowercase) is the sixth studio album by American singer-songwriter Taylor Swift. It was released on November 10, 2017, and was her last album  under Big Machine Records. Swift conceived the album amidst rampant tabloid scrutiny on her personal life and celebrity following her fifth studio album, 1989 (2014); she secluded herself from the press and social media, where she had maintained an active presence, and created the album as an effort to revamp her state of mind.


Inspired by the fantasy series Game of Thrones, Swift split the album's lyrical scope into two sides: one is vengeance and anger, and the other is love amidst the tumultuous events. She worked with two production teams, one with Jack Antonoff and the other with Max Martin and Shellback. The end product is a primarily electropop and R&B record with a heavy electronic production consisting of programmed drums, pulsating synthesizers, and manipulated vocals. Its songs incorporate influences of urban genres such as hip hop, EDM and trap.
Swift opted out of press interviews to promote the album, which she had done for previous releases. She cleared out her website and social media accounts, which generated wide internet attention and has since influenced other artists' promotional campaigns. Reputation was preceded by the lead single "Look What You Made Me Do", which reached number one on charts worldwide. The final international single, "Delicate", peaked atop US Billboard airplay charts. Critics received the album with generally positive reviews; some took issue with both the sound and theme as harsh, but most praised Swift's songwriting for depicting intimacy and vulnerability. Retrospective reviews have described Reputation as an album of experimentation and emotional evolution for Swift.
The album was Swift's fourth consecutive to debut atop the US Billboard 200 with first-week sales of over one million copies; it spent four weeks atop the chart. Reputation also topped charts in countries including Australia, Canada, and the UK. It was the best-selling album by a female artist of 2017, selling over 4.5 million copies. Swift in support of the album embarked on the Reputation Stadium Tour (2018), which became the highest-grossing North American tour of all time. Reputation was nominated for Best Pop Vocal Album at the 61st Annual Grammy Awards, and was listed on Slant Magazine's list of the best albums of the 2010s decade.
Background
American singer-songwriter Taylor Swift, who had identified as a country musician, released her fifth studio album, 1989, in October 2014. With 1989's synth-pop production, Swift departed from the country-music scene to embrace mainstream pop. The album received generally positive reviews and transformed Swift's status to that of a pop icon. It sold 10 million copies worldwide and its accompanying world tour was the highest-grossing of 2015. The album's singles, including three US Billboard Hot 100 chart toppers, dominated US airplay for over a year and a half, which Billboard described as "a kind of cultural omnipresence that's rare for a 2010s album".
During promotion of 1989, Swift continued to be a target of tabloid gossip. Her "girl squad" of female celebrity friends including fashion models, actresses, and singers, received backlash for allegedly promoting a false idea of feminism which The Daily Telegraph remarked as "impossibly beautiful women flaunting impossibly perfect lives". Media outlets publicized her short-lived romantic relationships with Scottish producer Calvin Harris and English actor Tom Hiddleston, and a feud with rapper Kanye West and media personality Kim Kardashian over West's song "Famous", in which he claims he made Swift a success ("I made that bitch famous").
Critics regarded Swift as calculating and accused her of capitalizing on the events to keep her name relevant. Her once-reputation as "America's Sweetheart", attributed to her down-to-earth and positive image, began to fade. The tumultuous events made her a subject of an online "#IsOverParty" hashtag and overshadowed her public advocacy; her placement on Time's 2017 People of the Year featuring women part of the MeToo movement against sexual misconduct prompted media debate over her worthiness, although she had won a sexual assault trial earlier. Swift became increasingly reticent on social media despite a large following, and avoided the press amidst the commotion. She announced a prolonged hiatus and felt "people might need a break from [her]".
Production
During her seclusion from social media, Swift worked on her sixth studio album with two production teams: one with pop rock producer Jack Antonoff, and the other with Swedish producers Max Martin and Shellback. She had previously worked with all three producers on 1989. By choosing a smaller production team, Swift envisioned that the album would be more coherent but still "versatile enough to kill 1989". She wrote the songs as a "defense mechanism" against the tumultuous media gossip targeting her during the time, and as a means to revamp her state of mind. Elaborating on the songwriting, Swift told Rolling Stone in a 2019 interview that she followed the songwriting for her 2014 single "Blank Space", on which she satirized her perceived image. She said, "I took that template of, OK, this is what you're all saying about me. Let me just write from this character for a second." In addition to the media commotion, love and friendship are major inspirations on the album, which corroborates Swift's trademark autobiographical storytelling through her songs.
The final cut of Reputation consists of 15 tracks, all of which Swift co-wrote. Martin and Shellback, the former of whom was co-executive producer with Swift on 1989, co-wrote and produced nine songs. Antonoff co-wrote and co-produced with Swift the remaining six. Swift's recording sessions with Antonoff mostly took place at his home studio in Brooklyn, with several trips to Atlanta and California for him to incorporate ideas from other producers. According to Antonoff, the sessions tried to capture Swift's emotions at a particular time, when "you can feel like you can conquer the world, or you can feel like the biggest piece of garbage that ever existed", resulting in a "very intense" record. He encouraged Swift to portray emotional honesty, and spoke of his work experience with Swift on Entertainment Weekly:
As Swift wanted to record the album in secrecy, he kept his studio computer offline to prevent a possible internet leak, and deleted the recording trials once the mixing and mastering finalized. The tracks produced by Swift and Antonoff feature a 1980s-styled sound equipped with pulsing synthesizers and upbeat choruses. For instance, Swift and Antonoff produced the song "Call It What You Want" using an Akai MPC and a Yamaha DX7 synthesizer. He cited that the song "Look What You Made Me Do", which would be the album's lead single, "came from nowhere ... Nothing I do is really that planned." Incorporating an interpolation of "I'm Too Sexy" by English band Right Said Fred, which Antonoff felt that it would bring about a "shock" element, the song is produced using modular synthesizers, drums, and "big fuzzy guitars through those EMI strips that come in in the second pre-chorus". An exception was the album's final track, "New Year's Day", which Swift and Antonoff recorded on an acoustic piano devoid of electronic sounds.
Music and lyrics
Composition
Swift referred to Reputation as her "most cathartic album", and called the whole album "a metaphor". She described the album's aesthetic as "evening-night", "all cityscape, darkness, full swamp witch". In 2019, Swift revealed the reason why the album's title is in all lowercase, stating that Reputation "felt like it wasn't unapologetically commercial". Swift also highlighted out that she played an alter ego in Reputation, explaining "it was just so fun to play with on tour — the darkness and the bombast and the bitterness and the love and the ups and the downs of an emotional-turmoil record".
Reputation is primarily an electropop album. It incorporates a heavy, maximalist electronic production with EDM instrumentation and rhythms. The melodies are characterized by underlying bass notes, pulsating synthesizers, and loud programmed drum machines. Pitchfork critic Jamieson Cox described the instrumentation as "hair-raising bass drops, vacuum-cleaner synths [...], stuttering trap percussion, cyborg backing choirs". Swift's voice is heavily manipulated, either distorted or multitracked. Critics found its sound heavier, louder, and darker than its predecessor 1989's bright synth-pop, with Neil McCormick from The Daily Telegraph deeming it "a big, brash, all-guns-blazing blast of weaponised pop". The two closing tracks, "Call It What You Want" and "New Year's Day", feature a softer sound, with the latter being the album's only acoustic track.
Influences of many urban genres, such as hip hop, R&B, trap, tropical house, and Miami bass, are visible throughout. Specifically, the drum patterns embrace trap influences and push Swift's vocals toward hip-hop-and-R&B-oriented cadences and delivery. For instance, "End Game" features hip-hop-influenced shuffling drums and Swift singing with loose, near-rap cadences. Cox found this influence to strip Swift's vocals off their expressiveness and give them a conversational quality. Kitty Empire of The Observer categorized Reputation as an R&B record, and Jon Caramanica of The New York Times summed up Reputation's sound as "soft-core pop-R&B". According to Caramanica, the musical influences of Reputation are rooted in black music, and Swift "[softens] them enough to where [she] can credibly attempt them".
Themes
According to Swift, Reputation's tracks have a linear timeline, starting with how she felt when she started working on the album, and transitioning to how she felt by the time it was completed. Inspired by the fantasy series Game of Thrones, she split the album into two sides; one contains songs about vengeance and drama with a heavier production, and the other about finding love, friendship, and "something sacred throughout all the battle cries". The series' characters and little hints to foreshadow the story lines, which Swift considered "cryptic", prompted her to finesse her songwriting and include "cryptic" messages through which she hoped to communicate with fans. She identified Game of Thrones influences for certain songs; "I Did Something Bad" was inspired by Arya Stark's plot to kill Littlefinger, "Look What You Made Me Do" by Arya Stark's "kill list", and "King of My Heart" by Daenerys Targaryen and Khal Drogo's romance.


Critic Steven Hyden regarded Reputation as a concept album about Swift's media personality and encapsulates her attention to the conversation surrounding her. Despite the first few tracks about outright vengeance and anger, much of Reputation is about romantic themes of finding love, intimacy, and expressing one's vulnerability when one thinks they might have suffered too much to love again. For Rob Sheffield of Rolling Stone, the album is a song cycle about how one stops chasing romance and defining their life based on others' perspectives, and instead starts to let life happen on its own. It contains references to alcohol and sex more than any of Swift's previous records.
Songs
The opening track, "...Ready for It?", is an electropop and industrial pop song, with a thumping bassline and elements of tropical house, dubstep and trap. The lyrics are about finding a "partner in crime". "End Game", featuring American rapper Future and English singer Ed Sheeran, is a self-reflective hip hop, R&B and pop-rap slow jam. Heavily manipulated by electronic elements and punctuated by strong beats, "I Did Something Bad" is a "bombastic" track with "unapologetic" lyrics that address "some of the narratives" that have surrounded Swift, incorporating a funky dubstep drop. The song was initially developed on a piano. Swift explained to fans at a secret session with audio released on iHeartRadio that the idea for the production of the song came to her in a dream. Swift described the concept to producer Max Martin, who used Swift's voice and pitched it down to create the desired effect in the post-chorus.
"Don't Blame Me" is a moody, atmospheric, "thunderous" electropop and gospel pop song with a dark, "thick" production of slick synthesizers, echoes and self-harmonization. Swift's vocal performance in the song has been described as "fierce", backed by gothic "love-as-a-drug" imagery in its lyrics. "Delicate" is a melodic "electro-ballad" and love song, with tropical house and dance-pop inflections, and a notable resonant refrain. Swift's goal for the song was to use a vocoder to create an "emotional" and "vulnerable" sound for the track. The song is about "what happens when you meet somebody that you really want in your life and then you start worrying about what they've heard before they met you".
The sixth track, "Look What You Made Me Do", started out as a poem and is "about realizing that you couldn't trust certain people, but realizing you appreciate the people you can trust." It interpolates the song "I'm Too Sexy" by the British dance-pop group Right Said Fred. Another Game of Thrones-inspired track, the line "I've got a list of names and yours is in red, underlined" acts as a reference to Arya Stark's kill list in the show. "So It Goes..." is a power ballad that opens with a murky segment and advances into a trap-lite chorus. Lyrically, it sees Swift "getting caught up in the moment" and "reflecting on just how a new love interest might help her out of her fixations", using a magician imagery. "Gorgeous" is an electropop song featuring an 808 drum with lyrics about falling in love and features a baby voice intro by James Reynolds, daughter of Blake Lively and Ryan Reynolds.
"Getaway Car" is a 1980s-influenced synth-pop number with lyrics about a doomed love affair where the narrator leaves a former lover for another using crime scene escape imagery and a reference to Bonnie and Clyde. "King of My Heart" is a synth-heavy track, which Swift structured such that each individual section of the song was its own phase of a relationship, with the sections getting deeper and more fast-paced as the song went on. Once again, the song's lyrics were inspired by Game of Thrones and its characters, specifically the romantic relationship between Daenerys and Khal Drogo, whereas the programmed drums in the song were influenced by the drums played by the Dothraki, a clan in the series.
The eleventh track, "Dancing With Our Hands Tied", begins as a melancholic downtempo song that discusses Swift's "will-we-won’t-we tale" of star-crossed lovers, "separated by an unkind fate", and also sees her singing about how "her every action is under the microscope". "Dress" is a sultry R&B slow jam that contains Swift's breathy vocals. It features booming bass, swelling synthesizers, and lyrics about sex with the narrator proclaiming that she "only bought this dress" to be taken off by her lover. Opening with a siren sound, "This Is Why We Can't Have Nice Things" is a call-out song deriding the haters and enemies of the narrator and features "a burst" of Swift's laughter.
The fourteenth track, "Call It What You Want", was recorded at Antonoff's home studio in Brooklyn. Swift said the song best represents her then emotional state. The song has been described as a "slow-burning meditation" and the "most by-the-book Swift song", filled with lyrical puns. It is a "stark" synth-pop love song, in which Swift raps softly over a production "made with an MPC, live kick, dx7 strings", sampling her voice in the intro and throughout, "making her voice into an instrument". Reputation concludes with "New Year's Day", which explores the flip-side of the romanticism of a New Year's Eve kiss, and is about how "the one that sticks around the next day" to "give you Advil and clean up the house" is the person that matters more. The track is a tender, intimate, acoustic piano ballad and love song, with lyrics acting as "evocative" snapshots, such as: "glitter on the floor after a party", "candle wax and polaroids on the hardwood floor", and "holding hands in the backseat of a taxi".
Artwork and packaging
Reputation's cover art was photographed by Mert and Marcus in London. The cover features a black-and-white photograph of an expressionless Swift in slicked-back hair, a loose-fitting grey sweatshirt with a zig-zag stitch on the right shoulder, and a choker necklace. Her name is printed multiple times in a newspaper-like typeface over one side of her face, which media outlets interpreted as a mockery at the media scrutiny. The cover inspired many internet memes and was listed among the worst album covers of 2017 by Billboard and Exclaim!. Target released two 72-page magazines that contain different content, including the album in the US. Walmart distributed it in Canada. The magazines contain photos, handwritten lyrics, poetry and paintings by Swift. The Reputation Vol. 1 magazine cover was shot by Mert and Marcus. Vol. 2 was shot by Benny Horne and features Swift in a camouflage jacket.
Release and promotion
Following her social media blackout, Swift first announced through Instagram on August 23, 2017, that her sixth album would be titled Reputation and released on November 10, 2017. The album's lead single, "Look What You Made Me Do", was released the next day on August 24. On September 2, Swift teased a second song during ABC's Saturday Night Football telecast and was later posted on Instagram, titled "...Ready for It?", previewing the new track. The song was released on September 3, 2017, as a promotional single. Two other tracks, "Gorgeous" and "Call It What You Want", also preceded Reputation as promotional singles with accompanying lyric videos.
On November 7, Bloomberg reported the album would be kept off streaming services upon release for an undetermined amount of time and would only be available to purchase in digital and physical formats. Later that same day, Swift posted the album's track list to her social media accounts. Reputation became available to streaming services on December 1, 2017. Digital purchases were initially exclusively sold through iTunes and as a full album only. Streaming was limited to a branded internet radio station on iHeartRadio's website and app until December 2017.
Reputation was Swift's last studio album to be released under Big Machine Records. In November 2018, Swift departed Big Machine Records for Republic Records.
Marketing
In August 2017, United Parcel Service (UPS) announced it would be the "Official Delivery Partner" for Reputation. UPS trucks in select cities featured the Reputation album cover, and fans were encouraged to take pictures of the trucks and post images to Twitter with a hashtag for an "improved opportunity" to buy concert tickets.
Although Swift had actively promoted albums with press interviews and television appearances, she opted out of such a campaign for Reputation. She instead held exclusive secret album-listening sessions within one month in advance for fans selected from social media by herself, hosting them at her homes in Rhode Island, Los Angeles, London, and Nashville. The secret sessions were reserved for 500 fans in total; behind-the-scenes footage was released on Good Morning America on November 7, 2017. She appeared on the cover for British Vogue, for which she appointed her own photographers and published a self-written poem instead of giving an interview. Swift partnered with AT&T to produce a multi-part behind-the-scenes series chronicling the making of Reputation, titled "The Making of a Song". The online series started on November 1 on AT&T's YouTube channel.
On November 9, a performance of the song "New Year's Day" was premiered during the broadcast of an episode of ABC's Scandal. It was filmed in one of the secret sessions, held at Swift's home in Rhode Island on October 18, with an audience of 100 fans. An extended version of Swift's performance was aired on November 10, during The DUFF's air on Freeform. On November 11, Swift was the musical guest on the fifth episode of the 43rd season of Saturday Night Live, where she performed "...Ready for It?" and "Call It What You Want" from the album. It was her first appearance on live television following the album's release, and her first appearance on the show since 2009.
Singles
On August 24, 2017, "Look What You Made Me Do" was released as the lead single from Reputation. The song broke several major records including the most Spotify streams in a 24-hour period by any artist. It hit number one on the US Billboard Hot 100 with the biggest sales and streaming figures of the year, becoming the fifth song by Swift to top the chart and also the first solo number one by a woman with 84.4 million streams since Adele's "Hello" in 2015 and the second biggest after "Harlem Shake" (103.3 million). Its accompanying music video later premiered at the 2017 MTV Video Music Awards and was viewed 43.2 million times on YouTube in its first 24 hours, the most in any video in history breaking the 36 million views of "Gentleman" in 2013.
On September 2, 2017, Swift teased on Instagram that the opening track off of Reputation, titled "...Ready for It?", was going to be released as a promotional single. It was made available for digital download with the pre-order of Reputation on September 3. Upon release, the song landed inside the top-10 of singles charts worldwide, including its entry at number four on the Billboard Hot 100. On October 24, "...Ready for It?" was upgraded into the album's second single, impacting US rhythmic contemporary radio; its official music video premiered three days later.
"End Game", featuring Ed Sheeran and Future, was released to French radio on November 14, 2017, as the album's third single. The song's music video was released in January 2018 after Sheeran confirmed its existence in early December 2017.
"New Year's Day" was serviced to American country radio as the album's fourth single on November 27, 2017.
"Delicate" was released to US pop radio as the album's fourth international single on March 12, 2018. Its music video premiered at the 2018 iHeartRadio Music Awards. It was the second single from Reputation to enter the top 10 of Billboard's Radio Songs chart (peaking at number two), after lead single "Look What You Made Me Do". A strong radio success, "Delicate" topped the Billboard Pop Songs chart, and was Reputation's first number-one single on the Billboard Adult Pop Songs and Adult Contemporary charts. It became the biggest single from Reputation on the US radio. "Delicate" peaked at number 12 and spent 35 weeks on the Billboard Hot 100, the longest-charting single from the album as well. It was one of the 10 most successful songs on US airplay of 2018, culminating 2.509 billion radio audience impressions. "Getaway Car" was the album's final single in Australia and New Zealand.
Tour
In August 2017, Swift partnered with Ticketmaster for a bundling program, with people wishing to buy her concert tickets could gain priority by purchasing merchandise and pre-ordering Reputation. On November 13, 2017, Swift announced she would be embarking on the Reputation Stadium Tour in 2018 in support of Reputation, first announcing North American dates. The tour began on May 8, 2018, at the University of Phoenix Stadium in Glendale, Arizona, and concluded on November 21, 2018, at the Tokyo Dome in Tokyo, Japan, with a total of 53 dates in stadiums throughout North America, Europe, Oceania and Asia. A concert film of the tour was released on Netflix on December 31, 2018, and it was filmed during the last concert of the North American leg, on October 6, 2018 at AT&T Stadium in Arlington, Texas.
Critical reception
Reputation received generally positive reviews from music critics; they praised Swift's personal lyricism and songwriting depicting vulnerability and intimacy, but some took issue with the more dramatic themes. At Metacritic, which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from professional publications, the album received a weighted average score of 71 based on 28 reviews.
Petridis opined Reputation, "may be mired in bitterness and gossip, but the pop star's songwriting smarts and lyrical prowess are impossible to deny on her sixth album", noting the songs see "Swift cutting her last ties with her Nashville roots in favour of the blare and honk of EDM-influenced pop". Sheffield writes Reputation, "shows the darker, deeper side of the pop mastermind". Sheffield also remarked, "As one of the all-time great pop masterminds, she's trying something new, as she always does." Roisin O'Connor of The Independent says "Call It What You Want" is "arguably, the best song Swift has ever made", also praising Jack Antonoff's production, calling it "essential" to the album; "[Antonoff's] love of Eighties synth-pop is the perfect counterbalance to Max Martin and Shellback's dance and electronic touch". Neil McCormick of The Daily Telegraph states, "Reputation is a big, brash, all-guns-blazing blast of weaponised pop that grapples with the vulnerability of the human heart as it is pummelled by 21st-century fame." McCormick continued, "This is an album with blockbuster event status, preceded by a satirical hit ("Look What You Made Me Do") in which she provocatively ditched her "girl-next-door" image for something more glamorously sophisticated." Troy Smith from The Plain Dealer said the album served as a reminder of Swift's songwriting talent, labeling "New Year's Day", "End Game", "Delicate" and "Dress" as standouts of the album.
In a negative review, Geoff Nelson of Consequence gave the album a D+ rating, and wrote Reputation is "a bloated, moving disaster" that "doesn't improve past its initial singles" and added "Swift finds trouble: She raps, she adopts African-American Vernacular English, and she bizarrely collaborates with Future." Nelson called "Gorgeous", "Delicate", and "Call It What You Want" the "strongest moments on the album".
Commercial performance
Worldwide, Reputation sold two million copies in its first week. In the U.S., the album sold roughly 700,000 copies after one day of availability, and 1.05 million within four days of release. Reputation ultimately became Swift's fifth number-one album on the US Billboard 200, debuting at number one with first-week figures of 1,238,000 album-equivalent units that consisted of 1,216,000 pure sales. It was her fourth album to sell a million copies in its first week, making Swift the first artist to have four albums each sell more than a million copies within one week since Nielsen SoundScan began tracking sales in 1991. It sold more than all other albums on the chart that week combined.
The album spent a total of four non-consecutive weeks at number one. It was the fourth to spend three or more weeks atop the Billboard 200 in 2017, after Starboy by The Weeknd, More Life by Drake, and Damn by Kendrick Lamar. Selling 1,903,000 copies by the end of 2017, Reputation was the best-selling album of the year in the U.S. In terms of total album-equivalent units, it earned 2,336,000 units, the year's third largest overall consumption behind Lamar's Damn and Ed Sheeran's ÷. It was 2018's Billboard 200 Year-End number-one album. By July 2019, the album had sold 2.23 million copies in the U.S. Reputation was certified 3× Platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) for surpassing three million album consumption units.
In Canada, Reputation was Swift's fifth number-one album on the Canadian Albums Chart. With first-week sales of 80,000 copies (81,000 album-equivalent units in total), it had the largest opening for an album in 2017. It spent three consecutive weeks atop the Canadian Albums Chart. The album sold 65,000 copies in the U.K. within three days, and opened atop the UK Albums Chart with 84,000 copies, becoming Swift's third UK number-one album. The album was certified Gold by the British Phonographic Industry (BPI).. By November 2022, the album had sold 550,000 copies on the UK.  Reputation also peaked atop the albums charts in European and Oceanic countries including Australia, Austria, Ireland, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, Slovakia, Spain, and Switzerland. It was certified triple platinum in Australia, double platinum in New Zealand, and platinum in Austria.
Reputation also achieved success in Asia. It became one of the best-selling digital albums in China, having sold over one million units as of August 2019. The album was certified platinum in Singapore and gold in Japan, where it peaked at number three on the Japanese Oricon albums chart. According to the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry (IFPI), Reputation was the world's second-best-selling album of 2017, with 4.5 million copies sold.
Legacy
Critics retrospectively regarded Reputation as a comeback album released after a period of immense media and internet scrutiny of Swift. According to the Official Charts, its "social media blackout" promotional campaign set a precedent for other pop stars to emulate. Swift's once-reputation as "America's Sweetheart", attributed to her bubbly and positive media image, faded into use by the time Reputation was released. Some critics interpreted Swift's silence in the press during promotion of the album, released amidst the chaotic events of the Donald Trump presidency, as a political statement; they criticized her for being aloof and tone-deaf to the contemporary political landscape.
In retrospect, Rolling Stone's Kara Voght said Reputation was "the first Swift album to truly be in conversation with its pop contemporaries". Lyndsey McKenna in NPR felt that Reputation's hip-hop experimentation helped Swift evolve her artistry leading up to her 2020 album Folklore, and Voght said its piercing, detail-heavy songwriting led to Swift's finesse of her craft on Folklore, Evermore (2020), and Midnights (2022). In 2022, Consequence published an article titled "What Were We Thinking? 15 Times We Were Wrong" and receded on its 2017 negative review of Reputation, opining that the album spoke to Swift's self-awareness and showed her evolution as a lyricist and a producer. Esquire's Lauren Kranc stated that "[w]hat should have been clear at the time is none of the music on reputation is political or specifically media-blasting at all ... reputation is Taylor reclaiming her own narrative. ... reputation was a risk, a revolution, even, but it was one she bulldozed." Jadey O'Regan, senior music lecturer at University of Sydney commented for ABC News that Swift used "the art of pop in the best way" with Reputation, acknowledging "the way she’s been stereotyped in popular culture."
Jennifer Kaytin Robinson, writer and director of 2022 teen comedy film Do Revenge, stated that Reputation inspired the film's themes and characters.
Track listing
Notes
Personnel
Credits are adapted from the album liner notes.