Road signs in Germany
Traffic signs, installations, and symbols used in Germany are prescribed by the Road Traffic Regulation (StVO) (German: Straßenverkehrs-Ordnung) and the Traffic Signs Catalog (VzKat) (German: Verkehrszeichenkatalog).
§§ 39 to 43 of the StVO regulate the effect of traffic signs and installations. Annexes 1 to 3 illustrate most danger, regulatory, and directional signs and annex 4 illustrates the traffic installations. Other traffic signs and installations not specified in the StVO, primarily specific supplementary signs, are published in the VzKat.
The VzKat was issued in May 2017 under the General Administrative Rules for the Road Traffic Regulation (VwV-StVO) (German: Allgemeine Verwaltungsvorschrift zur Straßenverkehrs-Ordnung).
All signs have assigned numbers. The suffix number after the hyphen refers to the variation of the sign; the suffix on signs with variable numbers is the number depicted on the sign (for speed limits, maximum heights, etc.).
Symbols
Symbols pursuant to § 39 paragraphs 7, 10, and 11 of the StVO:
Danger signs
Danger signs pursuant to part 2 of the VzKat which includes permissible variations of signs listed in annex 1 of the StVO. When one sign has two sign numbers, the first number is the illustrated sign while the latter number is a mirrored or slightly altered version of the sign.
Regulatory signs
Regulatory signs pursuant to part 3 of the VzKat which includes permissible variations of signs listed in annex 2 of the StVO. When one sign has two sign numbers, the first number is the illustrated sign while the latter number is a mirrored or slightly altered version of the sign.
Directional signs
Directional signs pursuant to part 4 of the VzKat which includes permissible variations of signs listed in annex 4 of the StVO. When one sign has two sign numbers, the first number is the illustrated sign while the latter number is a mirrored or slightly altered version of the sign.
Priority
Reißverschlussverfahren"Zipper rule" for one-way traffic merging & two-way traffic priorities
Environmental factors
Yield as necessary to not endanger themselves or other road users 
Traffic priority – priority roads
Priority traffic does not yield, signal all turns
Other factors
Yield or reduce speed as necessary
Vehicle classifications & specifics
Official (base) Symbols in Germany as per Straßenverkehrs-Ordnung (StVO) § 39 Verkehrszeichen
Basic
Red ring
In addition to any sign/placard, the red ring forbids (in general) the item noted and anything of greater size or value; i.e., if a car is pictured, then not only are cars not permitted but trucks, as well.
A red ring is also a traffic sign itself: No vehicles (of any type) permitted, pushing motorcycles/mopeds/bicycles permitted
Motorcycles
Classified as above/below 500 cc motor size, and with or without sidecar
Cars/automobiles
Personenkraftwagen – Pkw – "Powered car for (the transport of) persons"; e.g., cars/automobiles
Trucks & lorries
Lastkraftwagen – Lkw – (literally "powered car for loads", e.g., truck, lorry, semi, tractor-trailer)
Kraftfahrzeuge (Kfz) mit einer zulässigen Gesamtmasse über 3,5 t, einschließlich ihrer Anhänger, und Zugmaschinen, ausgenommen Personenkraftwagen und Kraftomnibusse – Motor vehicles with a maximum authorized mass of more than 3,5 t, including their trailers, and tractors other than cars and buses
Buses, public transit & rail
Buses (generally) and trains (always) have the priority/right-of-way
Basics
 Basic Traffic Controls 
 Speed Controls & Limits 
 Passing & Overtaking 
 Other 
Autobahn
 German Limited Access Highway  – Blue Background
Signs used on Autobahn
Signs leading to Autobahn
other signs
Signs of federal highways
Note: Though road design of Kraftfahrstraße is comparable to Autobahn, speed limit is mandatory, signposting is similar but has yellow background.
Fahrtbahn/Streifen – driving lane controls
Roadway lanes delineated by lines for/of single vehicle width
Stopping, waiting, parking
Parking is considered any stop exceeding three minutes.
Absolutely no stopping or waiting on traffic lanes (emergency excepted)
No waiting/standing longer than 3 minutes on traffic lanes – "Loading/unloading & pick-up/drop-off zone"
Bus stop and taxi zones
Road markings/lines
Intersections & Crosswalks
Driving Lanes
Standardized traffic symbols
Arrows
Retired signs
 Obsolete signs since 2017 
 Obsolete signs since 2013 