Ronald Reagan
Ronald Wilson Reagan (/ˈreɪɡən/ RAY-gən; February 6, 1911 – June 5, 2004) was an American politician, union leader, and actor who served as the 40th president of the United States from 1981 to 1989, the 33rd governor of California from 1967 to 1975, and the president of the Screen Actors Guild from 1947 to 1952 and 1959 to 1960.


Reagan was born in Tampico, Illinois. He graduated from Eureka College in 1932 and began to work as a sports announcer in Iowa. In 1937, Reagan moved to California, where he found work as a film actor. From 1947 to 1952, Reagan served as the president of the Screen Actors Guild, working to root out alleged communist influence within it. In the 1950s, he moved to a career in television and became a spokesman for General Electric. From 1959 to 1960, he again served as the guild's president. In 1964, his speech "A Time for Choosing" earned him national attention as a new conservative figure. Building a network of supporters, Reagan was elected governor of California in 1966. During his governorship, he raised taxes, turned the state budget deficit into a surplus, and challenged student protesters by ordering in National Guard troops.
After challenging and nearly defeating sitting president Gerald Ford in the 1976 Republican presidential primaries, Reagan easily won the Republican nomination in the 1980 presidential election and went on to defeat incumbent Democratic president Jimmy Carter in an Electoral College landslide. Early in his presidency, Reagan began implementing new political and economic initiatives. His supply-side economics policies, dubbed "Reaganomics", promoted economic deregulation and cuts in both taxes and government spending. He transitioned Cold War policy from détente to rollback by escalating an arms race with the Soviet Union. He also survived an assassination attempt, fought public sector labor unions, spurred the war on drugs, and ordered an invasion of Grenada. Reagan was overwhelmingly reelected in 1984, defeating Walter Mondale.
Foreign affairs dominated Reagan's second term, including the bombing of Libya, the Iran–Iraq War, the Iran–Contra affair, and a more conciliatory approach in talks with Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev. The talks culminated in the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty, which shrank both countries' nuclear arsenals. By the end of Reagan's presidency in 1989, the American economy had seen a significant reduction of inflation, the unemployment rate had fallen, and the United States was in its then-longest peacetime expansion. Reagan's post-presidency was hindered by his Alzheimer's disease. He died at his home in Los Angeles in 2004. His tenure constituted the Reagan era, and he is often considered a prominent conservative figure in the United States. Evaluations of his presidency among historians and the general public place him among the upper tier of American presidents.
Early life
Ronald Wilson Reagan was born on February 6, 1911, in an apartment on the second floor of a commercial building in Tampico, Illinois, as the younger son of Nelle Clyde Wilson and Jack Reagan. Nelle was committed to the Disciples of Christ, leading prayer meetings, running mid-week prayers at her church when the pastor was out of town, and supporting the Social Gospel. Reagan credited her spiritual influence and he became a Christian. According to Stephen Vaughn, Reagan's values came from his pastor, and the First Christian Church's religious, economic and social positions "coincided with the words, if not the beliefs of the latter-day Reagan." Jack was focused on making money so that he could take care of the family. He nicknamed Reagan "Dutch" for his "fat little Dutchman" appearance and Dutch boy haircut. Neil was Reagan's older brother.
Jack's alcoholism complicated his ability to make money. The family briefly lived in Chicago, Galesburg, and Monmouth before returning to Tampico. In 1920, Reagan and his family settled in the city of Dixon, which he called "his hometown". They lived in a house near the H. C. Pitney Variety Store Building. In Dixon, Reagan attended Dixon High School, where he developed interests in drama and football. His first job involved working as a lifeguard at the Rock River in Lowell Park. In 1928, Reagan attended Eureka College with Nelle's approval on religious grounds. He was as an "indifferent student" who studied economics and maintained a "C average" grade. He was involved in sports, drama, and campus politics. He was also elected student body president and joined a student strike that resulted in the college president's resignation.
Reagan's parents stance on "racial questions" were seemingly unusual when racial segregation was common in many Midwestern communities. His father strongly opposed the Ku Klux Klan and their anti-black racism. When his college football team was staying at a hotel that would not allow two black teammates to stay there, he invited them to his parents' home nearby in Dixon and his parents welcomed them. Reagan would later express his opposition to racism as a sports announcer and in Hollywood.
Entertainment career
Radio and film
After graduating from Eureka in 1932, Reagan took a job in Davenport, Iowa as a sports announcer for four football games in the Big Ten Conference. He then worked for WHO radio in Des Moines as an announcer for the Chicago Cubs of Major League Baseball. His specialty was creating play-by-play accounts of games using only basic descriptions that the station received by wire as the games were in progress. In 1936, while traveling with the Cubs to their spring training in California, Reagan took a screen test that led to a seven-year contract with the Warner Bros. studio.
Reagan arrived at Hollywood in 1937 and debuted in the B film Love Is on the Air (1937). After that film, he made numerous films before serving in the military in April 1942 such as Dark Victory (1939) with Bette Davis and Humphrey Bogart, Santa Fe Trail (1940), Knute Rockne, All American (1940), and Desperate Journey (1942) with co-star Errol Flynn. In Kings Row (1942), Reagan's character gets his legs amputated and asks, "Where's the rest of me?", which became the title of his 1965 autobiography. His performance was considered his best by many critics although the film was condemned by Bosley Crowther. Reagan became a star, and the studio tripled his weekly pay as he kept a warm relationship with Jack L. Warner. From 1941 to 1942, Gallup polls placed Reagan "in the top 100 stars".
World War II interrupted the movie stardom that Reagan would never be able to achieve again. Warner Bros. became uncertain about Reagan's ability to generate ticket sales, though he was dissatisfied with the roles he received. As a result, Lew Wasserman, renegotiated his contract with his studio, allowing him to also make films with Universal Pictures and Paramount Pictures as a freelancer. With this, Reagan appeared in Louisa (1950) and Bedtime for Bonzo (1951). He also appeared in multiple western films including Cattle Queen of Montana (1954). He ended his relationship with Warner Bros. in 1952, but would appear in a total of 53 films. Reagan's last appearance was in The Killers (1964).
Military service
When Reagan was working in Iowa, a United States Army Reserve member pitched him to join a local cavalry regiment that still used horses during the branch's decline. Reagan was interested in riding a horse at a young age and, without "a burning desire to be an army officer", he enlisted in April 1937. He was assigned as a private in Des Moines' 322nd Cavalry Regiment and reassigned to second lieutenant in the Officers Reserve Crops. He later became a part of the 323rd Cavalry Regiment in California.
As relations between the United States and Japan worsened, Reagan was ordered for active duty while he was filming Kings Row. Reagan's agent Wasserman and Warner Bros. lawyers successfully sent draft deferments to complete the film in October 1941. However, to avoid accusations of Reagan being a draft dodger, the studio let him go in April 1942. As Reagan reported for duty, the army was using machines as opposed to horses, and he had severe near-sightedness. His first assignment was at Fort Mason as a liaison officer, a role allowed that him to transfer to the United States Army Air Forces (AAF). He would became an AAF public relations officer and be subsequently assigned to the 18th AAF Base Unit in Culver City.
During his time in Culver City, Reagan felt that it was "impossible to remove an incompetent or lazy worker"; J. David Woodard suggests that "the incompetence, the delays, and inefficiencies" annoyed him. Despite this, Reagan participated Provisional Task Force Show Unit in Burbank and continued to make films such as the musical This Is the Army (1943). Reagan was also ordered to temporary duty in New York City to participate in the sixth War Loan Drive before being reassigned to Fort MacArthur until his discharge on December 9, 1945, as a captain. Throughout his military service, Reagan produced over 400 training films.
Screen Actors Guild presidency
Reagan was elected to the position of third vice president in 1946. When Robert Montgomery resigned as SAG president on March 10, 1947, Reagan was elected to that position, in a special election. Reagan's first tenure saw various labor-management disputes, the Taft–Hartley Act's implementation, and the Hollywood blacklist. On April 10, the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) interviewed Reagan and he provided them with the names of actors whom he believed to be communist sympathizers. During a House Un-American Activities Committee hearing, Reagan testified that some guild members were associated with the Communist Party and that he was well-informed on a "jurisdictional strike". When asked if he was aware of communist efforts within the Screen Writers Guild, he called the efforts "hearsay". Reagan would remain SAG president until he resigned on November 10, 1952; Walter Pidgeon succeeded him, but Reagan stayed on the board.
In 1958, MCA Inc. purchased the rights to air certain Paramount-produced films on television, resulting in significant profits that actors were not entitled to receive. The SAG would fight with film producers over residual payments and in November 1959, the board and Wasserman convinced Reagan to replace the resigning Howard Keel as SAG president. In his second stint, Reagan managed to secure the payments for actors whose theatrical films were released from 1948 to 1959 were televised. The producers were initially required to pay the actors fees, but they ultimately settled for pensions instead. However, they were still required to pay residuals for films after 1959. Reagan resigned from the presidency on June 7, 1960 and George Chandler succeeded him. Reagan also left the board.
Marriages and children
Reagan married Brother Rat (1938) co-star Jane Wyman on January 26, 1940. Together, they had two biological daughters, Maureen in 1941, and Christine, born prematurely and dead the next day in 1947. They adopted one son, Michael, in 1945. In 1948, Wyman filed to divorce Reagan, citing "mental cruelty". Wyman was uninterested in politics, and she would occasionally separate and reconcile with Reagan. Although Reagan was unprepared, they split amicably, and the divorce was finalized in July 1949. Reagan would also remain close to his children. Later that year, Reagan met Nancy Davis after she contacted him in his capacity as the guild's president about her name appearing on a communist blacklist in Hollywood; she had been mistaken for another Nancy Davis. They married on March 4, 1952 and had two children, Patti in 1952, and Ron in 1958.
Television
Reagan initially refused to work in television and on Broadway theatre, but after receiving offers to work in nightclubs in 1954, he became the host of the MCA television production General Electric Theater at his agent's recommendation. It featured multiple guest stars, and Ronald and Nancy Reagan, who continued to use the stage name Nancy Davis, acted together in three episodes. Television was a new medium, and when asked how Reagan was able to recruit the stars to appear on the show, he said, "Good stories, top direction, production quality." However, the viewership declined in the 1960s and the show was canceled in 1962. In 1965, Reagan became the host another MCA production, Death Valley Days.
Early political activities
Reagan began as a Democrat, viewing Franklin D. Roosevelt as "a true hero". He joined the American Veterans Committee and Hollywood Independent Citizens Committee of the Arts, Sciences and Professions (HICCASP), and worked with the AFL–CIO to fight right-to-work laws. In 1945, Reagan planned to lead an HICCASP anti-nuclear rally, but Warner Bros. prevented him from going. Regardless, he continued his support for the abolition of nuclear weapons when he was the president of the United States. Reagan also supported Harry S. Truman in the 1948 presidential election and Helen Gahagan Douglas for the United States Senate in 1950. It was Reagan's belief that communism was a powerful backstage influence in Hollywood that led him to rally his friends against them.
Reagan began shifting to the right when he supported the presidential campaigns of Dwight D. Eisenhower in 1952 and Richard Nixon in 1960. When Reagan was contracted by General Electric (GE), he began giving speeches to their employees. His speeches had a positive take on businesses, but a negative take on government. Under anti-communist Lemuel Boulware, the employees were encouraged to vote for business-friendly officials. In 1961, Reagan adapted his speeches into another speech to criticize Medicare. In his view, its legislation would have meant "the end of individual freedom in the United States". In 1962, Reagan was dropped by GE, and he formally registered as a Republican. He said, "I didn't leave the Democratic Party. The party left me."
In 1964, Reagan gave a speech for presidential contender Barry Goldwater that was eventually referred to as "A Time for Choosing". Reagan argued that the Founding Fathers "knew that governments don't control things. And they knew when a government sets out to do that, it must use force and coercion to achieve its purpose" and that "We've been told increasingly that we must choose between left or right." Even though the speech was not enough to turn around the faltering Goldwater campaign, it increased Reagan's profile among conservatives. David S. Broder and Stephen H. Hess called it "the most successful national political debut since William Jennings Bryan electrified the 1896 Democratic convention with his famous 'Cross of Gold' address".
1966 California gubernatorial election
Pat Brown's reelection over Nixon in 1962 and Goldwater's loss in 1964 left the Republicans without a clear pathway to victory. In January 1966, Reagan announced his candidacy, repeating his stances on individual freedom and big government. In a March meeting with black Republicans, he was accused of appealing to white racial resentment and backlash against the Civil Rights Act of 1964. Certain in his own lack of prejudice, Reagan responded resentfully that bigotry was not in his nature before walking out. He returned to the meeting and later argued that certain provisions of the act infringed on a citizens' right to private property. After the Supreme Court of California struck down the Rumford Act in May, he voiced his support for the act's repeal, but later preferred amending it. In the primary, Reagan defeated George Christopher, a moderate who William F. Buckley Jr. thought had framed Reagan as extreme.
Christopher promised to help Reagan unseat Brown, who attacked Reagan for being extreme while touting his own accomplishments. Reagan portrayed himself as a political outsider, and charged Brown for his accountability for the Watts riots and lenience on crime. Cannon notes that the Free Speech Movement, high taxes, unrestrained spending, and lack of accountability were often considered issues in Reagan's campaign speeches. He also notes that Reagan benefited on television in comparison to the seemingly unpleasant governor. Reagan was endorsed by Eisenhower and William Scranton, who saw Reagan as a presidential contender if he won the governorship, while the press continued to perceive Reagan as "monumentally ignorant of state issues". Ultimately, Reagan won the general election in a landslide.
California governorship (1967–1975)
Brown spent much of California's funds on new projects, prompting them to use accrual accounting to avoid raising taxes. Consequently, it generated a larger deficit, and Reagan would call for reduced government spending and tax hikes to balance the budget. He left his fiscal responsibility principles behind to work with Jesse M. Unruh on securing tax increases and property tax cuts. As a result, taxes on sales, banks, corporate profits, inheritances, liquor, and cigarettes jumped. Kevin Starr states, Reagan "gave Californians the biggest tax hike in their history—and got away with it." In the 1970 gubernatorial election, Unruh used the property tax cuts and Reagan's tax relief requests against him for benefiting the wealthy. The strategy worked as Reagan would raise taxes once more. By 1973, the budget had a surplus, which Reagan preferred using "to give back to the people" instead of funding more projects.
The existence of the Black Panther Party resulted in Reagan signing the Mulford Act in 1967. The act prohibited the public carrying of loaded firearms. On May 2, before the act was passed, 26 Panthers were arrested after interrupting a debate on the bill in the California State Capitol. The act was California's most aggressive piece of gun control legislation, with critics saying that it was "overreaching the political activism of organizations". Hopeful that future handgun buyers would reconsider their own actions in the wake of the protest, Reagan approved additional legislation to establish a waiting period of fifteen days. Although the Panthers gained national attention, their membership barely grew. The act marked the beginning of both modern legislation and public attitude studies on gun control.
After Reagan won the 1966 election, he and his advisors planned a run in the 1968 Republican presidential primaries. The continuing Vietnam War was a campaign issue, and the candidates' views on the war contrasted from each other. Reagan presented himself as a war hawk in an attempt to slow down communism's spread. He ran as an unofficial candidate to cut into Nixon's southern support and be a compromise candidate if there were to be a brokered convention. He won California's delegates, but Nixon secured enough delegates for the nomination. Reagan then campaigned for Nixon in the general election, and supported Nixon's withdrawal of troops from Vietnam in Nixon's presidency.
Reagan was critical of administrators tolerating student demonstrations at the University of California, Berkeley. On May 15, 1969, he sent the California Highway Patrol and other officers to quell the People's Park protests. This led to one student being shot and killed, and the injuries of numerous police officers and two reporters in the conflict. Reagan then commanded the state National Guard troops to occupy the city of Berkeley for seventeen days to subdue the protesters, which allowed the students to attend class safely. One year after the incident, Reagan responded to questions about the protests, saying, "If it takes a bloodbath, let's get it over with. No more appeasement." He regretted making the statement when in the same year, more violent protests broke out at the University of California, Santa Barbara, where one student was inadvertently killed by a policeman.
During his victorious reelection campaign, Reagan, remaining critical of government, promised to prioritize welfare reform. He was concerned that the programs were disincentivizing work and that the growing welfare rolls would lead to both an unbalanced budget and another big tax hike in 1972. At the same time, the Federal Reserve increased interest rates to combat inflation, putting the American economy in a mild recession. Reagan worked with Bob Moretti to tighten up the eligibility requirements so that the financially needy could continue receiving payments. This was only accomplished after Reagan softened his criticism of Nixon's Family Assistance Plan. Nixon then lifted regulations to shepherd California's experiment. In 1975, the Employment Development Department released a report revealing that the experiment that ran from 1971 to 1974 was unsuccessful.
Reagan did not run for the governorship in 1974, and it was won by Pat Brown's son, Jerry. Reagan's governorship, as Gary K. Clabaugh suggests, saw public schools deteriorate due to a lack of funding, especially the ones in the Los Angeles Unified School District. As for higher education, William Trombley of the Los Angeles Times believed that the budget cuts Reagan enacted damaged Berkeley's student-faculty ratio and research. Additionally, Cannon points out that both the homicide and armed robbery rates increased after 1974, even with the many laws Reagan signed to try to toughen criminal sentencing and reform the criminal justice system. Reagan strongly supported capital punishment, but his efforts to enforce it were thwarted by People v. Anderson in 1972. However, according to his son, Michael, Reagan said that he regretted signing the Family Law Act that granted no-fault divorces. Unaware of the mental health provision, Reagan expressed regret over signing the Therapeutic Abortion Act that allowed abortions in the cases of rape and incest.
Seeking the presidency (1975–1981)
1976 Republican primaries
As president, Gerald Ford suffered from public criticism of his pardon of Nixon, the high unemployment, and the inability to pass energy legislation. Conservatives felt that the fall of Saigon had weakened the United States, and they were turned away by the Ford administration's bailout of the indebted New York City. In 1975, Reagan called for a revitalization of the Republican Party. He repeated his anti-government "Time for Choosing" speech around the country, and on November 20, he announced his presidential campaign. To the contrary, Ford, who spent over 25 years in the United States Congress, never expected him to run. In a phone call with Reagan, Ford disagreed with Reagan's opinion that challenging him would not be divisive or hurt their party. Ford had never been elected president, and he ran to be elected in his own right.
John P. Sears relied on a strategy to help Reagan win the New Hampshire primary to lessen the possibility of Ford's nomination. The strategy failed and Reagan lost the first five primaries. When Reagan finally defeated Ford in North Carolina, the party's delegates were convinced that Ford's nomination was no longer guaranteed. Reagan went on to win more primaries, but by the end, nobody had the necessary 1,130 delegates to secure the nomination. Throughout the primaries, Reagan often gave an anecdote of a black woman named Linda Taylor living in Chicago, saying that she used multiple names, addresses and Social Security numbers, and fraudulently collected veterans' benefits. In 1977, she was convicted of welfare fraud and perjury. Although he never mentioned her name or overtly mentioned her race, the Chicago Tribune labeled her a "welfare queen", a term critics deem derogatory towards welfare recipients and in specific cases, racist. In Florida, Reagan accused Ford for handing the Panama Canal to Panama's government while Ford implied that Reagan would end Social Security.
Ahead of the convention in Kansas City, Reagan took Sears' advice of choosing liberal U.S. senator Richard Schweiker as his running mate as a way to distract Ford. Instead, conservatives were left alienated. Ford picked up the uncommitted delegates and prevailed, earning 1,187 to Reagan's 1,070. Before Ford gave his acceptance speech, he invited Reagan to address the convention. In his speech, Reagan emphasized individual freedom and the dangers of nuclear weapons. Reagan later campaigned for Ford in twenty states against the Democratic nominee, Jimmy Carter, who would win the general election. However, in Washington state, a faithless elector gave Reagan one electoral vote instead of Ford. In 1977, Ford told Cannon that Reagan's primary challenge played a role in his own narrow loss to Carter.
1978 California state elections
In an attempt to attract the Christian right, John V. Briggs sponsored California Proposition 6, which sought to ban gays and lesbians from working in state schools. Early opposition was led by gay and lesbian activists, and after persuasion from David Mixner, Reagan moved to publicly oppose the ballot, writing an editorial of his opposition in the Los Angeles Herald Examiner. His editorial stated, in part, "Homosexuality is not a contagious disease like the measles. Prevailing scientific opinion is that an individual's sexuality is determined at a very early age and that a child’s teachers do not really influence this." Polls conducted by Mervin Field showed a majority of respondents supporting Proposition 6 before Reagan's decision, but in the end, the ballot was largely unsuccessful. Meanwhile, the religious right was gaining traction elsewhere, and Reagan would appeal to evangelical leaders in his next presidential campaign. However, Reagan supported Proposition 13, a successful ballot that limited property taxes. It was similar to an unsuccessful ballot Reagan sponsored in 1973. Schweiker predicted that Proposition 13 would help Reagan ascend to the presidency in 1980. The ballot's passing has been characterized as a tax revolt and, from Robert Byrd's perspective, it helped transform Reagan into "a tax-cutting crusader".
1980 election
In 1978, the United States signed the Torrijos–Carter Treaties, and in the following year, an oil crisis began. Inflation, interest rates and unemployment were soaring as well. This set Carter up as a vulnerable candidate in the upcoming presidential election. On November 13, Reagan announced his candidacy with an indictment of the federal government. He and many of his Republican primary opponents stressed his fundamental principles of tax cuts to stimulate the economy and having both a small government and strong national defense. Heading into 1980, Reagan's age became an issue among the press, and the United States was in a severe recession. In the primaries, Reagan lost Iowa to George H. W. Bush, but rebounded in New Hampshire. Soon thereafter, Reagan's opponents began dropping out of the primaries, including John B. Anderson, who left the party to become an independent candidate. Reagan captured the presidential nomination with ease and chose Bush as his running mate at the convention in Detroit.
The general election pitted Reagan against Carter and was conducted amid the multitude of domestic concerns, as well as the ongoing Iran hostage crisis. Carter portrayed Reagan as an extremist, and Anderson had support from Rockefeller Republicans. During a debate on October 28, Reagan used the phrase "There you go again" after Carter said that Reagan's political career started with an attack on Medicare. He later asked the audience if they were better off than they were four years earlier. On November 4, Reagan won a decisive victory in the Electoral College over Carter, carrying 44 states and receiving 489 electoral votes to Carter's 49 in six states and the District of Columbia. He won the popular vote by a narrower margin, receiving 51 percent to Carter's 41 percent and Anderson's 7 percent. Republicans also won a majority of seats in the Senate. Reagan's win was fueled by evangelical support, including those who were disappointed with Carter's support for abortion.
Woodard writes that the election of Reagan signaled a new political era as liberal Republicans and conservative Democrats changed their party affiliations. However, Reagan's campaign has also been used as an example of dog whistle politics. In his speech at the Neshoba County Fair, Reagan used the term "states' rights", and referred to "Cadillac-driving welfare queens" and "strapping young bucks buying T-bone steaks with food stamps". Some also saw these actions as an extension of the Southern strategy to garner white support for Republican candidates. According to Joseph Crespino, Reagan's speech and visit to the fair was designed to reach out to the voters inclined toward segregationist George Wallace. Reagan's supporters have pointed out their belief that this was his typical anti-big government rhetoric, without racial context or intent.
Presidency (1981–1989)
First inauguration
The 40th president of the United States, Reagan was 69 years, 349 days of age when he was sworn into office for his first term on January 20, 1981, making him the oldest first-term president at the time. He held this distinction until 2017 when Donald Trump was inaugurated at the age of 70 years, 220 days. In his inaugural address, he addressed the country's economic malaise, arguing, "In this present crisis, government is not the solution to our problem, government is the problem." In a final insult to President Carter, Iran waited until Reagan had been sworn in before sending the hostages home.
Assassination attempt
On March 30, 1981, Reagan, James Brady, Thomas Delahanty, and Tim McCarthy were struck by gunfire from John Hinckley Jr. outside the Washington Hilton. Although "right on the margin of death" upon arrival at George Washington University Hospital, Reagan underwent surgery and recovered quickly. The attempt had a significant influence on Reagan's popularity as his approval rating reached 73 percent. Religiously, Paul Kengor attributes the attempt to Reagan scaling down his church attendance, and Reagan believed that God had spared his life so that he might go on to fulfill a specific purpose, defeating "communism in the Soviet bloc".
Public sector labor union fights
In August 1981, the Professional Air Traffic Controllers Organization (PATCO) went on strike, violating a federal law prohibiting government unions from striking. On August 3, Reagan stated that he would fire air traffic controllers if they did not return to work within 48 hours. Two days later, he stated that 38 percent did not return before firing around 12,000 striking air traffic controllers who had ignored his order on August 13. Reagan used military controllers and supervisors to handle the nation's commercial air traffic until new controllers could be hired and trained. The breaking of the PATCO strike demoralized organized labor, and the number of strikes fell dramatically in the 1980s. With the assent of Reagan's sympathetic National Labor Relations Board appointees, many companies also won wage and benefit cutbacks from unions, especially in the manufacturing sector. During Reagan's time in office, the share of employees who were part of a labor union dropped from approximately one-fourth of the total workforce to approximately one-sixth of the total workforce.
Taxation
Reagan implemented neoliberal policies based on supply-side economics, advocating a laissez-faire philosophy and seeking to stimulate the economy with across-the-board tax cuts. He signed the Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981 to significantly lower federal income tax rates and require exemptions and brackets to be indexed for inflation starting in 1985. The Tax Reform Act of 1986 reduced the number of tax brackets and increased personal exemptions. Reagan proposed that the tax cuts would not increase the deficit as long as there was enough to offset the increase in revenue, a theory that entered economic discussion as the Laffer curve. His policies proposed that economic growth would occur when the tax cuts spur investments, which would result in more spending and consumption. Critics labeled this "trickle-down economics", the belief that tax policies that benefit the wealthy will spread to the poor. Conversely, Milton Friedman and Robert Mundell argued that the policies invigorated America's economy and contributed to the economic boom of the 1990s.
Reagan also raised taxes eleven times. He signed the Tax Equity and Fiscal Responsibility Act of 1982 amid growing concerns about the mounting federal debt. Many of his supporters condemned the bill, but he defended his preservation of cuts on individual income tax rates. Among other provisions, the bill doubled the federal cigarette tax and rescinded a portion of the corporate tax cuts from the 1981 tax bill. By 1983, the amount of federal tax had fallen for all or most taxpayers, but most strongly affected the wealthy. According to Paul Krugman, "Over all, the 1982 tax increase undid about a third of the 1981 cut; as a share of GDP, the increase was substantially larger than Mr. Clinton's 1993 tax increase."
Inflation and unemployment
Reagan took office in the midst of stagflation. The economy briefly experienced growth before plunging into a recession in July 1981. Federal Reserve chairman Paul Volcker sought to fight inflation by pursuing a tight money policy of high interest rates, which restricted lending and investment, raised unemployment, and temporarily reduced economic growth. In December 1982, unemployment was nearly 11 percent. Around the same time, economic activity began to rise until 1990 when it ended, setting the record for the longest peacetime expansion. In 1983, the recession ended and Reagan nominated Volcker to a second term in fear of damaging confidence in the economic recovery.
In 1987, Reagan appointed Alan Greenspan to succeed Volcker. Greenspan raised interest rates in another attempt to curb inflation, setting off the 1987 stock market crash although the markets eventually recovered. By 1989, inflation dropped from 12 percent during the 1980 election to under 5 percent. Likewise, the unemployment rate was approximately 5 percent. While interest rates were over 15 percent during the election, they finished below 10 percent. Yet, not all shared equally in the economic recovery, and both economic inequality and the number of homeless individuals increased during the 1980s. Critics argue that a majority of the jobs created during that time paid the minimum wage.
Government spending
In 1981, in a effort to keep it solvent, Reagan approved a plan for cuts to Social Security. He later backed off of these plans due to public backlash. He then created the Greenspan Commission to keep Social Security financially secure and in 1983, he signed amendments to raise both the program's payroll taxes and retirement age for benefits. In his diaries, Reagan wrote his desire to reverse the effects of the Great Society and war on poverty. He had signed the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1981 to cut funding for federal assistance such as food stamps, unemployment benefits, subsidized housing and the Aid to Families with Dependent Children, and would discontinue the Comprehensive Employment and Training Act. On the other side, defense spending doubled between 1981 and 1985.
Deregulation
Reagan sought to loosen federal regulation of economic activities, and he appointed key officials who shared this agenda. William Leuchtenburg writes that by 1986, the Reagan administration eliminated almost half of the federal regulations that had existed in 1981. The 1982 Garn–St. Germain Depository Institutions Act deregulated savings and loan associations by letting them make a variety of loans and investments outside of real estate. After the bill's passage, savings and loans associations engaged in riskier activities, and the leaders of some institutions embezzled funds. The administration's inattentiveness toward the industry contributed to the savings and loan crisis and costly bailouts.
Deficits
The deficits were exacerbated by the early 1980s recession, which cut into federal revenue. The national debt tripled between the fiscal years of 1980 and 1989, and the national debt as a percentage of the gross domestic product rose from 33 percent in 1981 to 53 percent by 1989. During his time in office, Reagan never submitted a balanced budget. The United States borrowed heavily in order to cover newly spawned federal budget deficits. Reagan described the tripled debt the "greatest disappointment of his presidency". Jeffrey Frankel opined that the deficits were a major reason why Reagan's successor, Bush, reneged on his campaign promise by raising taxes as part of the Budget Enforcement Act of 1990.
Civil rights
Early in his presidency, Reagan appointed Clarence M. Pendleton Jr. as chair of the United States Commission on Civil Rights to criticism for politicizing the agency. Pendleton and Reagan's subsequent appointees steered the commission in line with Reagan's views on civil right policy, arousing the ire of civil rights advocates. Despite Reagan having opposed the Voting Rights Act of 1965, the bill was extended for 25 years in 1982. He initially opposed the establishment of Martin Luther King Jr. Day, but signed a veto-proof bill to create the holiday in 1983. He initially opposed the bill because of cost concerns, and also alluded to claims that King was associated with communists during his career. In 1984, he signed legislation to enhance "the ability of women to earn pensions in their own right" and to "strengthen enforcement of fair housing laws". Throughout Reagan's first term, a considerably fewer amount of fair housing cases were filed, unlike the three previous administrations.
In March 1988, Reagan vetoed the Civil Rights Restoration Act of 1987, but Congress overrode his veto. He had argued that the bill unreasonably increased the federal government's power and undermined the rights of churches and business owners. Later in September, legislation was passed to correct loopholes in the Fair Housing Act of 1968. Reagan's second term saw an increase in fair housing cases. Overall, his recasting of civil rights has been described as the largest since Lyndon B. Johnson's presidency.
War on drugs
In response to concerns about the increasing crack epidemic, Reagan intensified the war on drugs in 1982. At the time, the American public did not see drugs as an important issue, and the FBI, Drug Enforcement Administration and the United States Department of Defense all increased their anti-drug funding immensely. The Reagan administration publicized the campaign to gain support after crack became widespread in 1985. Reagan eventually signed the Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1986 and Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1988 to fund the campaign and specify a mandatory minimum penalty for drug offenses. The bills were criticized for promoting racial disparities and creating economic hardships. Additionally, Nancy Reagan founded the "Just Say No" campaign to discourage others from engaging in recreational drug use and raise awareness about the dangers of drugs. Defenders of the administration's effort point to success in reducing rates of drug use among high school students. According to Scott Lilienfeld and Hal Arkowitz, the success of these types of campaigns on decreasing rates of drug usage and abuse have not been found to be affirmatively proven.
Escalation of the Cold War
Reagan ordered a massive defense buildup and deployed the MX missile. In response to Soviet deployment of the SS-20, he oversaw NATO's deployment of the Pershing missile in Western Europe. In 1982, Reagan tried to cut off the Soviet Union's access to hard currency by impeding its proposed gas line to Western Europe. It hurt the Soviet economy, but it also caused ill will among American allies in Europe who counted on that revenue; he retreated on this issue. In March 1983, Reagan introduced the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) to protect the United States from an attack by strategic nuclear ballistic missiles. He believed that this defense shield could make nuclear war impossible. There was much disbelief surrounding the program's scientific feasibility, leading opponents to dub the SDI "Star Wars", though Soviet leader Yuri Andropov said it would lead to "an extremely dangerous path".
In a 1982 address to the British Parliament, Reagan said, "the march of freedom and democracy ... will leave Marxism–Leninism on the ash heap of history." In a speech to the National Association of Evangelicals in March 1983, he called the Soviet Union an "evil empire". After Soviet fighters downed Korean Air Lines Flight 007 in September, which included Larry McDonald and 61 other Americans, Reagan expressed outrage towards the Soviet Union. The following day, reports revealed that the Soviets had fired the plane by mistake.
Reagan rejected his predecessors' policies of détente. In his 1985 State of the Union Address, he proclaimed, "Support for freedom fighters is self-defense." Through the Reagan Doctrine, his administration supported anti-communist resistance movements in an effort to rollback Soviet-backed communist governments in Africa, Asia, and Latin America. Reagan's covert aid to Afghan mujahideen forces against the Soviets has been given credit for assisting in ending the Soviet occupation of Afghanistan although some of the American-funded armaments introduced then would later pose a threat to American troops in the 2001–2021 war in Afghanistan. However, the administration also agreed with the communist government in China to reduce the sale of arms to Taiwan. Critics have felt that the administration ignored the human rights violations in the countries they backed, including genocide and mass killings.
Invasion of Grenada
On October 19, 1983, Grenadan leader Maurice Bishop was overthrown and murdered by one of his colleagues. Several days later, Reagan ordered American forces to invade Grenada. Reagan cited a regional threat posed by a Soviet-Cuban military build-up in the Caribbean nation and concern for the safety of several hundred American medical students at St. George's University as adequate reasons to invade. Two days of fighting commenced, resulting in an American victory. While the invasion enjoyed public support in the United States, it was criticized internationally, with the United Nations General Assembly voting to censure the American government. Regardless, Cannon notes that the invasion overshadowed the 1983 Beirut barracks bombings throughout Reagan's 1984 presidential campaign.
1984 election
Reagan announced his reelection campaign on January 29, 1984, declaring, "America is back and standing tall." He ran facing little opposition in the Republican primaries. The withdrawal of the United States Marine Corps from the Lebanon helped increase his chances of reelection. Reagan accepted the nomination at the party's convention in Dallas, Texas. He proclaimed that it was "morning again in America", regarding the recovering economy and the dominating performance by the American athletes at the 1984 Summer Olympics on home soil, among other things.
Reagan's opponent in the general election was former vice president Walter Mondale. Following a weak performance in the first presidential debate, Reagan's ability to win another term was questioned. Reagan rebounded in the second debate; confronting questions about his age, he quipped: "I will not make age an issue of this campaign. I am not going to exploit, for political purposes, my opponent's youth and inexperience". This remark generated applause and laughter, even from Mondale himself.
That November, Reagan won a landslide reelection victory, carrying 49 of the 50 states. Mondale won only his home state of Minnesota and the District of Columbia. Reagan won 525 of the 538 electoral votes, the most of any presidential candidate in U.S. history. In terms of electoral votes, Roosevelt's 1936 victory over Alf Landon, in which he won 98.5 percent or 523 of the then-total 531 electoral votes, was the most-lopsided presidential election. Reagan won 58.8 percent of the popular vote to Mondale's 40.6 percent.
Response to the AIDS epidemic
According to AIDS activist organizations such as ACT UP and scholars such as Don Francis and Peter S. Arno, the Reagan administration largely ignored the AIDS crisis, which began to unfold in the United States in 1981. They also said that AIDS research was chronically underfunded during Reagan's administration and requests for more funding by doctors at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention were routinely denied.
In 1984, according to Reagan's White House physician John Hutton, Reagan thought of AIDS as though "it was the measles and would go away". However, the death of his friend Rock Hudson changed Reagan's view, approaching Hutton for more information on the disease. In a September 1985 press conference, a few months after Hudson's announcement that he had the disease, Reagan responded to an AIDS related question: "This is a top priority with us, yes, there's no question about the seriousness of this and the need to find an answer." Deroy Murdock of the National Review responded to the charge of the underfunding of AIDS by saying that AIDS spending under President Reagan rose from $8 million in 1982 to $2.3 billion by 1989.
By 1986, Reagan asked his surgeon general C. Everett Koop to draw up a report on the AIDS issue. Koop drew the ire of many evangelical conservatives, both in and out of the Reagan administration, by stressing the importance of sex education including condom usage in schools. Attitudes such as these helped galvanize gay rights activists; large demonstrations followed such as ACT UP's march in New York City in 1987. When President Reagan gave his first prepared speech on the epidemic, six years into his tenure, 36,058 Americans had been diagnosed with AIDS, and 20,849 had died of it. By 1989, more than 100,000 people had been diagnosed with AIDS in the United States and more than 59,000 of them had died of it.
Addressing apartheid
From the late 1960s onward, the American public grew increasingly vocal in its opposition to the apartheid policy of the white-minority government of South Africa, and in its insistence that the United States impose economic and diplomatic sanctions on South Africa. The strength of the anti-apartheid opposition surged during Reagan's first term in office as its component disinvestment from South Africa movement, which had been in existence for quite some years, gained critical mass following in the United States, particularly on college campuses and among mainline Protestant denominations. President Reagan was opposed to divestiture because, as he wrote in a letter to Sammy Davis Jr., it "would hurt the very people we are trying to help and would leave us no contact within South Africa to try and bring influence to bear on the government". He also noted the fact that the "American-owned industries there employ more than 80,000 blacks" and that their employment practices were "very different from the normal South African customs".
The Reagan administration developed a policy of constructive engagement with the South African government as a means of encouraging it to move away from apartheid gradually. It was part of a larger initiative designed to foster peaceful economic development and political change throughout southern Africa. This policy however, engendered much public criticism and renewed calls for the imposition of stringent sanctions. In response, Reagan announced the imposition of new sanctions on the South African government, including an arms embargo in late 1985. These sanctions were seen as weak by anti-apartheid activists and as insufficient by the president's opponents in Congress. In August 1986, Congress approved the Comprehensive Anti-Apartheid Act, which included tougher sanctions. Reagan vetoed the act, but the veto was overridden by Congress. Afterward, Reagan reiterated that his administration and "all America" opposed apartheid, and said, "the debate ... was not whether or not to oppose apartheid but, instead, how best to oppose it and how best to bring freedom to that troubled country." Several European countries, as well as Japan, also imposed their sanctions on South Africa soon after.
Libya bombing
Relations between Libya and the United States under President Reagan were continually contentious, beginning with the 1981 Gulf of Sidra incident; by 1982, Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi was considered by the Central Intelligence Agency to be, along with Soviet Union leader Leonid Brezhnev and Cuban leader Fidel Castro, part of a group known as the "unholy trinity" and was also labeled as "our international public enemy number one" by a CIA official. These tensions were later revived in early April 1986 when a bomb exploded in a Berlin discothèque, resulting in the injury of 63 American military personnel and death of one serviceman. Stating that there was "irrefutable proof" that Libya had directed the "terrorist bombing", Reagan authorized the use of force against the country. In the late evening of April 15, 1986, the United States launched a series of airstrikes on ground targets in Libya.
British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher allowed the United States Air Force to use Britain's air bases to launch the attack, on the justification that the United Kingdom was supporting America's right to self-defense under Article 51 of the Charter of the United Nations. The attack was, according to Reagan, designed to halt Gaddafi's "ability to export terrorism", offering him "incentives and reasons to alter his criminal behavior". After the attacks began, Reagan addressed the nation, stating, "When our citizens are attacked or abused anywhere in the world on the direct orders of hostile regimes, we will respond so long as I'm in this office." The attack was condemned by many countries; by an overwhelming vote, the United Nations General Assembly adopted a resolution to condemn the attack and deem it a violation of the Charter and international law.
Iran–Contra affair
Reagan authorized William J. Casey to arm the Contras, fearing that Communists would take over Nicaragua if it remained under the leadership of the Sandinistas. Congress passed the 1982 Boland Amendment, prohibiting the CIA and United States Department of Defense from using their budgets to provide aid to the Contras. Still, the Reagan administration raised funds for the Contras from private donors and foreign governments. When Congress learned that the CIA had secretly placed naval mines in Nicaraguan harbors, Congress passed a second Boland Amendment that barred granting any assistance to the Contras. In reaction to the role Israel and the United States played in the Lebanese Civil War, Hezbollah began to take American hostages, holding eight Americans by the middle of 1985.
Reagan procured the release of seven American hostages held by Hezbollah by selling American arms to Iran, then engaged in the Iran–Iraq War, in hopes that Iran would pressure Hezbollah to release the hostages. The Reagan administration sold over 2,000 missiles to Iran without informing Congress; Hezbollah released four hostages but captured an additional six Americans. On Oliver North's initiative, the administration redirected the proceeds from the missile sales to the Contras. The transactions were exposed by Lebanese neswpaper Ash-Shiraa in early November 1986. Reagan initially denied any wrongdoing, but on November 25, he announced that John Poindexter and North had left the administration and that he would form the Tower Commission to investigate the transactions. A few weeks later, Reagan asked a panel of federal judges to appoint a special prosecutor who would conduct a separate investigation.
The Tower Commission released a report in February 1987 confirming that the administration had traded arms for hostages and sent the proceeds of the weapons sales to the Contras. The report laid most of the blame on North, Poindexter, and Robert McFarlane, but it was also critical of Donald Regan and other White House staffers. Investigators did not find conclusive proof that Reagan had known about the aid provided to the Contras, but the report noted that Reagan had "created the conditions which made possible the crimes committed by others" and had "knowingly participated or acquiesced in covering up the scandal." The affair damaged the administration and raised questions about Reagan's competency and the wisdom of conservative policies. The administration's credibility was also badly damaged on the international stage as it had violated its own arms embargo on Iran.
Soviet decline and thaw in relations
Three different Soviet leaders died between 1982 and 1985, leaving the Soviet Union with an unstable leadership until Mikhail Gorbachev came to power in 1985. Although the Soviets did not accelerate military spending in response to Reagan's military buildup, their enormous military expenses, in combination with collectivized agriculture and inefficient planned manufacturing, were a heavy burden for the Soviet economy. At the same time, the prices of oil, the primary source of Soviet export revenues, fell to one third of the previous level in 1985. These factors contributed to a stagnant economy during Gorbachev's tenure.
Reagan's foreign policy towards the Soviets wavered between brinkmanship and cooperation. Reagan appreciated Gorbachev's revolutionary change in the direction of the Soviet policy and shifted to diplomacy, intending to encourage him to pursue substantial arms agreements. They held four summit conferences between 1985 and 1988. Reagan believed that if he could persuade the Soviets to allow for more democracy and free speech, this would lead to reform and the end of communism. The critical summit was in Reykjavík in 1986, where they met alone with translators but no aides. To the astonishment of the world, and the chagrin of Reagan's most conservative supporters, they agreed to abolish all nuclear weapons. However, Gorbachev added the condition that SDI research must be confined to laboratories during the ten-year period when disarmament would take place. Reagan refused, stating that it was defensive only and that he would share the secrets with the Soviets, thus failing to reach a deal.
During a visit to West Berlin in June 1987, Reagan addressed Gorbachev during a speech at the Berlin Wall, demanding that he "tear down this wall". The remark was ignored at the time, but after the wall fell in 1989, it was retroactively recast as a soaring achievement over the years. Reagan and Gorbachev met again at the Washington Summit in December 1987 to sign the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty (INF Treaty); their signatories committed to the total abolition of their respective short-range and medium-range missile stockpiles. The treaty established an inspections regime designed to ensure that both parties honored the agreement. Reagan and Gorbachev also discussed the Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty, but the SDI continued to be a major point of contention. In May 1988, the U.S. Senate overwhelmingly voted in favor of ratifying the INF Treaty, providing a major boost to Reagan's popularity in the aftermath of the Iran–Contra affair. A new era of trade and openness between the two powers commenced, and the United States and Soviet Union cooperated on international issues such as the Iran–Iraq War.
Supreme Court nominations
Reagan appointed Sandra Day O'Connor, Antonin Scalia, and Anthony Kennedy to the Supreme Court of the United States. He also appointed William Rehnquist as the court's chief justice. Through its rulings, the Rehnquist Court often promoted a policy of New Federalism in which more power was given to the states at the expense of the federal government. The Rehnquist Court has been considered a cause of the Supreme Court's move in a conservative direction.
Post-presidency (1989–2004)
After leaving office on January 20, 1989, the Reagans purchased a home in Bel Air, Los Angeles, in addition to Rancho del Cielo in Santa Barbara. They regularly attended Bel Air Church and made public appearances including at the dedication and opening of the Ronald Reagan Presidential Library in 1991. On April 13, 1992, Reagan was assaulted by Richard Springer, an anti-nuclear protester, while accepting an award from the National Association of Broadcasters in Las Vegas, though Reagan was not injured. Reagan later spoke at the 1992 Republican National Convention. He continued to speak publicly in favor of the Brady Bill, a constitutional amendment requiring a balanced budget, and the repeal of the 22nd Amendment. His final public speech occurred on February 3, 1994, during a tribute to him in Washington, D.C.; his last major public appearance was at the funeral of Richard Nixon on April 27, 1994.
In August 1994, Reagan was diagnosed with Alzheimer's disease. In November of that year, he revealed the diagnosis through a handwritten letter. There was speculation over how long Reagan had demonstrated symptoms of mental degeneration, but lay observations that he suffered from Alzheimer's while still in office have been widely refuted by medical experts; his doctors said that he first began exhibiting overt symptoms of the illness in late 1992 or 1993. As the years went on, the disease slowly destroyed Reagan's mental capacity. He was able to recognize only a few people including his wife, Nancy Reagan. Still, he continued to walk through parks and on beaches, playing golf, and until 1999, often going to his office in nearby Century City. Eventually, his family decided that he would live in quiet semi-isolation with his wife, who became a stem-cell research advocate, asserting that it could lead to a cure for Alzheimer's.
Reagan died of pneumonia, complicated by Alzheimer's disease, at his home in Los Angeles, in the afternoon of June 5, 2004. President George W. Bush called Reagan's death "a sad hour in the life of America". Three days later, a brief family funeral was held at Reagan's his presidential library. On June 9, his body was flown to Washington, D.C. to lie in state in the Capitol rotunda with a state funeral conducted in the Washington National Cathedral on June 11. Eulogies were given by Thatcher, Brian Mulroney, George H. W. Bush, and George W. Bush. Many other world leaders attended, including Gorbachev and Prince Charles, representing his mother Queen Elizabeth II. Reagan, then the longest-lived American president at 93 years and 120 days, was interred at his library.
Legacy
Reagan's legacy is the subject of substantial debate among scholars, historians, and the general public. Supporters have pointed to a more efficient and prosperous economy as a result of his economic policies, and a restoration of American pride and morale. Proponents say that Reagan's unabated and passionate love for the United States restored faith in the American Dream after a decline in American confidence and self-respect under Carter's perceived weak leadership. They also believe that his foreign policy triumphs including a peaceful end to the Cold War and that Reagan's defense policies, economic policies, military policies and hard-line rhetoric against the Soviet Union and communism—together with his summits with General Secretary Gorbachev—played a significant part in ending the Cold War. He was the first president to reject containment and détente and to put into practice the concept that the Soviet Union could be defeated rather than simply negotiated with, a post-détente strategy.
Gorbachev said Reagan "was instrumental in bringing about the end of the Cold War", and deemed him "a great president". Gorbachev did not acknowledge a win or loss in the war, but rather a peaceful end; he said he was not intimidated by Reagan's harsh rhetoric. Thatcher said that Reagan, who noticed what he considered the Soviet Union's "systemic failures", "had a higher claim than any other leader to have won the Cold War for liberty and he did it without a shot being fired." Mulroney said that Reagan "enters history as a strong and dramatic player". Former Polish President Lech Wałęsa said "Reagan was one of the world leaders who made a major contribution to communism's collapse."
Critics point out that Reagan's economic policies resulted in rising budget deficits and the national debt, a wider gap in wealth, and an increase in homelessness, and that the Iran–Contra affair lowered American credibility. Professor Jeffrey Knopf has argued that Reagan's leadership was only one of several causes of the end of the Cold War and that his aggressive rhetoric toward the Soviet Union had mixed effects; being labeled "evil" probably made no difference to the Soviets but gave encouragement to the East-European citizens opposed to communism. President Truman's policy of containment is also regarded as a force behind the fall of the Soviet Union, and the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan undermined the Soviet system itself. At the time of his death,  Howard Kurtz of The Washington Post opined that Reagan was "a far more controversial figure in his time than the largely gushing obits on television would suggest".
Despite the debate, many conservative and liberal scholars agree that Reagan has been the most influential president since Roosevelt, leaving his imprint on American politics, diplomacy, culture, and economics through his effective communication of his conservative agenda and pragmatic compromising. As summarized by British historian M. J. Heale, since Reagan left office, historians have reached a broad consensus that he rehabilitated conservatism, turned the nation to the right, practiced a considerably pragmatic conservatism that balanced ideology and the constraints of politics, revived faith in the presidency and American exceptionalism, and contributed to victory in the Cold War.
Political influence
Reagan reshaped the Republican Party and led a new conservative movement, altering the political dynamic of the United States. Conservatism became the dominant ideology for Republicans, displacing the party's liberals and moderates. More men voted Republican and Reagan tapped into religious voters, resulting in Reagan Democrats. He often emphasized family values, despite being the first president to have been divorced. Furthermore, Reagan, the oldest president at the time, was supported by young voters, an allegiance that shifted many of them to the party. He also appealed to black voters in 1980, but would receive the lowest black vote for a Republican presidential candidate at the time.
Since 1988, Republican presidential candidates have invoked Reagan's policies and beliefs, especially the 2008 candidates who aimed to liken themselves to him during the primary debates, even imitating his campaign strategies; John McCain frequently said that he came to office as "a foot soldier in the Reagan Revolution". Washington Post reporter Carlos Lozada noted Trump's praising of Reagan in a book he published during his 2016 campaign.
The period of American history most dominated by Reagan and his policies that concerned taxes, welfare, defense, the federal judiciary, and the Cold War is known as the Reagan era, which emphasized that the Reagan Revolution had a permanent impact on the United States in domestic and foreign policy. The Bill Clinton administration is often treated as an extension of the era, as is the George W. Bush administration. Eric Foner noted that Barack Obama's 2008 presidential campaign "aroused a great deal of wishful thinking among those yearning for a change after nearly thirty years of Reaganism".
Public image
Shortly before Reagan left the presidency, polls indicated that he held an approval rating of 70 percent, setting the record as the highest for a departing president. Retrospective Gallup polls continued to show a majority of Americans approving Reagan's performance in 2010 and 2018. Similarly, their 2001, 2005, and 2011 surveys considered Reagan the "greatest president" in American history. C-SPAN's surveys of scholars ranked Reagan tenth place in 2000 and ninth in 2009, 2017, and 2021.
Reagan's ability to talk about substantive issues with understandable terms and to focus on mainstream American concerns earned him the laudatory moniker "The Great Communicator". Of it, he said, "I won the nickname the great communicator. But I never thought it was my style that made a difference—it was the content. I wasn't a great communicator, but I communicated great things." He also earned the nickname "Teflon President" in that public perceptions of him were not tarnished by the controversies that arose during his administration.
Reagan's age and soft-spoken speech gave him a warm grandfatherly image. He was known for storytelling and humor in which many of his jokes and one-liners have been labeled "classic quips" and "legendary". In preparation for a radio address in 1984, Reagan joked about outlawing and bombing Russia. During the celebration of the 750th anniversary of Berlin in 1987, a balloon popped. Without missing a beat, he quipped, "missed me" in reference to his assassination attempt. Reagan also had the ability to offer comfort and hope at times of tragedy as demonstrated in aftermath of the Space Shuttle Challenger disaster. The combination of Reagan's speaking style, unabashed patriotism, negotiation skills, and savvy use of the media, played an important role in defining the 1980s and his legacy.
Recognition
Since leaving office, Reagan received numerous awards and honors such as the honorary knight Grand Cross of the Order of the Bath, Grand Cordon of the Order of the Chrysanthemum, and Presidential Medal of Freedom. On his 87th birthday in 1998, Washington National Airport was renamed Ronald Reagan Washington National Airport. In 2001, USS Ronald Reagan was christened by Nancy and the U.S. Navy. In 2002, Congress authorized the creation of the Ronald Reagan Boyhood Home. In 2009, Nancy unveiled a statue of her late husband in the National Statuary Hall Collection.
Depictions
Reagan is depicted in television films such as The Day Reagan Was Shot (2001), The Reagans (2003) and Killing Reagan (2016), and in a feature film named The Butler (2013). In 2018, feature film Reagan, based on two biographies by Kengor, is scheduled for release in 2023. He is also depicted in the video game Call of Duty: Black Ops Cold War. In music, he is the subject of many rock and pop songs.