Ronit Roy
Ronit Bose Roy (born 11 October 1965) is an Indian actor, known for his works primarily in Hindi television and films alongside Tamil and Telugu cinema. Roy has earned numerous accolades in his career including a Filmfare Award, two Screen Awards, five ITA Awards and six Indian Telly Awards.


Early life and background
Roy was born on 11 October 1965 in Nagpur in a Bengali family. He is the eldest son of businessman, Brotin Bose Roy and Dolly Roy. His younger brother, Rohit Roy is also a TV actor. Ronit Roy spent his childhood in Ahmedabad, Gujarat. This is where he did his schooling with the father of Ayush Sarkar, teenage actor. He received primary education from Ankur School, Ahmedabad. After his schooling, Roy pursued hotel management.
After completion of his studies, he moved to Mumbai and stayed at the residence of filmmaker Subhash Ghai. While Roy was keen to work in the film industry, Subhash Ghai persuaded him, not to pursue it due to the difficulties associated with it. Ronit worked as a management trainee at Mumbai's Sea Rock Hotel. To have experience at all different levels, Ronit's work ranged from dish-washing and cleaning to serving tables and bar-tending.
Career
TV career
Roy received a call from Balaji Telefilms to offer him a part in the television serial Kammal. Due to the lack of any appealing film offers, he accepted the offer. Before Kammal got started, Balaji Telefilms also offered Ronit for Kasautii Zindagii Kay as Rishabh Bajaj, a middle aged business tycoon. That also landed him in Balaji Telefilms' Kyunki Saas Bhi Kabhi Bahu Thi as Mihir Virani, replacing Amar Upadhyay and Inder Kumar.
From 2009 to 2011, he played the role of Dharamraj in NDTV Imagine's Bandini, which won him accolades for his astonishing portrayal of a crude and ruthless diamond merchant who is never defeated.
He has also participated in Jhalak Dikhhla Jaa, a dance reality show in 2007, and another show, Yeh Hai Jalwa in 2008 as a contestant. He hosted the Kitchen Champions in 2010 which was on Colors TV.
In 2010, he starred in Sony TV's popular courtroom drama show Adaalat as K.D. Pathak, a sharp unique lawyer who only fights for the truth.
He returned to the drama genre in 2014 with Balaji Telefilms's  Itna Karo Na Mujhe Pyar as Dr. Nachiket Khanna, alias Neil K opposite Pallavi Kulkarni.
In 2016, he starred in Adaalat (season 2) where he reprised his character from the previous season.
Film career
Roy made his debut in Hindi film industry with Jaan Tere Naam (1992) which was a commercial success. He starred with Aditya Pancholi and Kishori Shahane in Bomb Blast (1993). which was also a commercial success.
After his success on TV, Roy featured in more Hindi films in supporting roles. In 2010, he starred in the critically acclaimed film Udaan; his work was much praised and won him many accolades. Roy's performance was ranked among 100 greatest performances of the decade list by Film Companion.
Udaan brought Roy back to the film scene. He next starred in films such as Anurag Kashyap's That Girl in Yellow Boots, Karan Johar's Student of the Year, Deepa Mehta's Midnight's Children, Sanjay Gupta's Shootout at Wadala (produced by Ekta Kapoor), and Anurag Kashyap's Ugly.
In 2013, he played main antagonist in the Akshay Kumar starrer BOSS and in 2014 he appeared in 2 States in which his performance received much appreciation.
In 2017, he has also shared screen with Hrithik Roshan playing the role of an antagonist in the thriller film Kaabil. In the same year he made his debut in Telugu with N.T.R Jr. starrer Jai Lava Kusa, where he played the role of main antagonist Sarkar. He has also appeared in films like Machine (2017), Lucknow Central (2017) and Loveyatri (2018).
Roy was seen next in Puri Jagannadh directed romantic sports film Liger. It will also feature Vijay Deverakonda, Ananya Panday, Ramya Krishnan and Makarand Deshpande.
Digital career
In 2018, Roy made his digital debut in an ALTBalaji's web series Kehne Ko Humsafar Hain along with Mona Singh and Gurdeep Kohli.
In 2019, he starred in an Indian crime thriller web series Hostages.
Business venture
Roy owns Ace Security and Protection agency (AceSquad Security Services LLP). It currently caters to Bollywood actors such as Salman Khan, Amitabh Bacchan, Mithun Chakraborty, Shahrukh Khan and Aamir Khan; also to Indian Premier League ex-Chairman and ex-Commissioner Lalit Modi and his son Ruchir Modi. Some of the film projects that Ace Security and Protection have also lent their services to are Lagaan, Dil Chahta Hai, Yaadein, Na Tum Jano Na Hum, Saathiya, and Armaan.
Personal life
Roy was married to a woman named Joanna and they have a daughter name Ona.
On 25 December 2003, he married actress and model Neelam Singh, with whom he has a daughter Aador (born May 2005) and son Agastya (born October 2007).
Controversy
On 27 October 2011, Ronit Roy was arrested by Mumbai police for rash and negligent driving, after he was involved in a road accident in the Amboli suburb of Mumbai. He was returning from a Diwali party when his high speeding Mercedes car hit a Wagon-R injuring people, one of whom was seriously hurt.
However, he got bail within few hours and was released. The initial medical report didn't find any sign of drugs in Ronit Roy's stomach.