Schizotypal personality disorder
Schizotypal personality disorder (STPD or SPD), also known as schizotypal disorder, is a mental and behavioral disorder. DSM classification describes the disorder specifically as a personality disorder characterized by thought disorder, paranoia, a characteristic form of social anxiety, derealization, transient psychosis, and unconventional beliefs. People with this disorder feel pronounced discomfort in forming and maintaining social connections with other people, primarily due to the belief that other people harbor negative thoughts and views about them. Peculiar speech mannerisms and socially unexpected modes of dress are also characteristic. Schizotypal people may react oddly in conversations, not respond, or talk to themselves. They frequently interpret situations as being strange or having unusual meaning for them; paranormal and superstitious beliefs are common. Schizotypal people usually disagree with the suggestion their thoughts and behaviors are a 'disorder', and seek medical attention for depression or anxiety instead. Schizotypal personality disorder occurs in approximately 3% of the general population and is more commonly diagnosed in males.
History
The term "schizotype" was first coined by Sandor Rado in 1956 as a portmanteau of "schizophrenic phenotype". STPD is classified as a cluster A personality disorder, also known as the "odd or eccentric" cluster.
STPD as a proper diagnosis was first introduced in 1980, with the release of the DSM-III. The diagnosis was created to fill the gap between Borderline Personality Disorder (BPD) and moderate schizophrenia-like symptoms. Because of this, many early studies were either seeking to distinguish it from other diagnoses, specifically BPD, or identify its utility in recognizing non-clinical people who were genetically predisposed to schizophrenia.
Very few changes were made from the DSM-IV-TR to the DSM-V in terms of the diagnostic criteria. 
Causes
Genetic
A schizotypal personality disorder is widely understood to be a "schizophrenia spectrum" disorder. Rates of schizotypal personality disorder are much higher in relatives of individuals with schizophrenia than in the relatives of people with other mental illnesses or in people without mental illness. Technically speaking, a schizotypal personality disorder may also be considered an "extended phenotype" that helps geneticists track the familial or genetic transmission of the genes that are implicated in schizophrenia pathogenesis. But there is also a genetic connection of STPD to mood disorders and depression in particular. Prediction of schizophrenia based on schizotypal traits has a higher accuracy for individuals with high genetic risk for STPD.


Social and environmental
Unique environmental factors, which differ from shared sibling experiences, have been found to play a role in the development of STPD and its dimensions. There is now evidence to suggest that parenting styles, early separation, trauma/maltreatment history (especially early childhood neglect) can lead to the development of schizotypal traits. Neglect or abuse, trauma, or family dysfunction during childhood may increase the risk of developing schizotypal personality disorder. There is also evidence indicating influenza in the prenatal environment could have an effect on development of STPD. Over time, children learn to interpret social cues and respond appropriately but for unknown reasons this process does not work well for people with this disorder.
Schizotypal personality disorders are characterized by a common attentional impairment in various degrees that could serve as a marker of biological susceptibility to STPD. The reason is that an individual who has difficulties taking in information may find it difficult in complicated social situations where interpersonal cues and attentive communications are essential for quality interaction. This might eventually cause the individual to withdraw from most social interactions, thus leading to asociality.
Diagnosis
Screening
There are various methods of screening for schizotypal personality. The Schizotypal Personality Questionnaire (SPQ) measures nine traits of STPD using a  self-report assessment. The nine traits referenced are Ideas of Reference, Excessive Social Anxiety, Odd Beliefs or Magical Thinking, Unusual Perceptual Experiences, Odd or Eccentric Behavior, No Close Friends, Odd Speech, Constricted Affect, and Suspiciousness. A study found that of the participants who scored in the top 10th percentile of all the SPQ scores, 55% were clinically diagnosed with STPD. A method that measures the risk for developing psychosis through self-reports is the Wisconsin Schizotypy Scale (WSS). The WSS divides schizotypal personality traits into 4 scales for Perceptual Aberration, Magical Ideation, Revised Social Anhedonia, and Physical Anhedonia. A comparison of the SPQ and the WSS suggests that these measures should be cautiously used for screening purposes of STPD.
DSM-5
In the American Psychiatric Association's DSM-5, schizotypal personality disorder is defined as a "pervasive pattern of social and interpersonal deficits marked by acute discomfort with, and reduced capacity for, close relationships as well as by cognitive or perceptual distortions and eccentricities of behavior, beginning by early adulthood and present in a variety of contexts."
At least five of the following symptoms must be present:
These symptoms must not occur only during the course of a disorder with similar symptoms (such as schizophrenia or autism spectrum disorder).
The symptoms of "lacking close friends" and "suspiciousness or paranoia" have been used for diagnosing STPD by the DSM-V. These criteria overlap with symptoms for Paranoid personality disorder (PPD) and Schizoid personality disorder (SzPD), making these symptoms not as useful when distinguishing STPD from other personality disorders.
ICD-10
The World Health Organization's ICD-10 uses the name schizotypal disorder (F21). It is classified as a clinical disorder associated with schizophrenia, rather than a personality disorder as in DSM-5.
The ICD definition is:
Diagnostic guidelines
This diagnostic rubric is not recommended for general use because it is not clearly demarcated either from simple schizophrenia or from schizoid or paranoid personality disorders, or possibly autism spectrum disorders as currently diagnosed. If the term is used, three or four of the typical features listed above should have been present, continuously or episodically, for at least two years. The individual must never have met criteria for schizophrenia itself. A history of schizophrenia in a first-degree relative gives additional weight to the diagnosis but is not a prerequisite.
Treatment
Medication
STPD is rarely seen as the primary reason for treatment in a clinical setting, but it often occurs as a comorbid finding with other mental disorders. When patients with STPD are prescribed pharmaceuticals, they are usually prescribed neuroleptics, also known as antipsychotics, of the sort used to treat schizophrenia; however, the use of neuroleptic drugs in the schizotypal population is in great doubt. While people with schizotypal personality disorder and other attenuated psychotic-spectrum disorders may have a good outcome with neuroleptics in the short term, long-term follow-up suggests significant impairment in daily functioning compared to schizotypal and even schizophrenic people without neuroleptic drug exposure. Positive, negative, and depressive symptoms were shown to be improved by the used of olanzapine, a neuroleptic.  Those with comorbid OCD and STPD were most positively affected by the use of olanzapine, and showed worse outcomes with the use of clomipramine, an antidepressant. 
Antidepressants are also sometimes prescribed, whether for STPD proper or for comorbid anxiety and depression. However, there is some ambiguity in the efficacy of antidepressants, as many studies have only tested people with STPD and comorbid obsessive-compulsive disorder or borderline personality disorder. They have shown little efficacy for treating dysthymia and anhedonia related to STPD. 
Both of these medications are the most frequently prescribed medication for STPD, though the use and efficacy of them should be evaluated differently for every case.
The use of stimulants have also shown some efficacy, especially for those with worsened cognitive and attentional issues. Patients that suffer from concurrent psychosis should be monitored more closely if stimulants are used as part of their treatment. 
Therapy
According to Theodore Millon, schizotypal personality disorder is one of the easiest personality disorders to identify but one of the most difficult to treat with psychotherapy. Persons with STPD usually consider themselves to be simply eccentric or nonconformist; the degree to which they consider their social nonconformity a problem differs from the degree to which it is considered a problem in psychiatry. It is difficult to gain rapport with people with STPD due to the fact that increasing familiarity and intimacy usually increase their level of anxiety and discomfort.
Group therapy is recommended for persons with STPD only if the group is well structured and supportive. Otherwise, it could lead to loose and tangential ideation. Support is especially important for schizotypal patients with predominant paranoid symptoms, because they will have a lot of difficulties even in highly structured groups.
Comorbidity
Schizotypal personality disorder frequently co-occurs with major depressive disorder, dysthymia and social phobia. Furthermore, sometimes schizotypal personality disorder can co-occur with obsessive–compulsive disorder, and its presence appears to affect treatment outcome adversely. Some people with a clinical diagnosis of OCD have been found to also possess many schizotypal personality traits resulting in what can be called ‘schizotypal OCD’. Without proper treatment, STPD tendencies, such as magical thinking and paranoid ideation, could worsen the symptoms of OCD in an individual. 
In terms of comorbidity with other personality disorders, schizotypal personality disorder has high comorbidity with schizoid and paranoid personality disorder, the other two 'Cluster A' conditions. Studies have found that cognitive impairment was worse in those with PPD or STPD, but the co-occurrence of the two had little impact. It also has significant comorbidity with borderline personality disorder and narcissistic personality disorder.
Some schizotypal people go on to develop schizophrenia, but most of them do not.  There are dozens of studies showing that individuals with schizotypal personality disorder score similar to individuals with schizophrenia on a very wide range of neuropsychological tests. Cognitive deficits in patients with schizotypal personality disorder are very similar to, but quantitatively milder than, those for patients with schizophrenia. A 2004 study, however, reported neurological evidence that did "not entirely support the model that SPD is simply an attenuated form of schizophrenia".
Epidemiology
Reported prevalence of STPD in community studies ranges from 1.37% in a Norwegian sample, to 4.6% in an American sample.A large American study found a lifetime prevalence of 3.9%, with somewhat higher rates among men (4.2%) than women (3.7%). It may be uncommon in clinical populations, with reported rates of up to 1.9%.
There is little known about the real world effect that STPD has on individuals. There does seem to be a relationship between STPD and not living on one's own or having a Bachelor's degree. People with STPD also seemed to be paid lower hours wages when compared to a healthy control group. The disorder also seems to be related to lack of employment, though this is specifically related to worsened cognitive impairment. 
Chance of STPD were seen highest in Black women, low socioeconomic people, and people separated from their partners, with the lowest rates in Asian men.
Together with other cluster A personality disorders, it is also very common among homeless people who show up at drop-in centers, according to a 2008 New York study. The study did not address homeless people who do not show up at drop-in centers.
Adolescent cannabis users have an increased likelihood of self-reporting and possessing schizotypal personality disorder or traits consistent with STPD. Another epidemiological study on suicidal behavior in STPD found that, even when accounted for sociodemographic factors, people with STPD were 1.51 times more likely to attempt suicide. The same study found that people with childhood adversities, specifically abuse by a parent or caretaker, have a strongly significant association with lifetime STPD.
Schizotypal disorder is over diagnosed in Russia and other post-Soviet states.