Shafi'i school
The Shafiʽi (Arabic: شَافِعِي, romanized: Shāfiʿī, also spelled Shafei) school, also known as Madhhab al-Shāfiʿī, is one of the four major traditional schools of religious law (madhhab) in the Sunnī branch of Islam. It was founded by Arab theologian Muḥammad ibn Idrīs al-Shāfiʿī, "the father of Muslim jurisprudence", in the early 9th century.
The other three schools of Sunnī jurisprudence are Ḥanafī, Mālikī and Ḥanbalī. Like the other schools of fiqh, Shafiʽi  recognize the First Four Caliphs as the Islamic prophet Muhammad’s rightful successors and relies on the Qurʾān and the "sound" books of Ḥadīths as primary sources of law. The Shafi'i school affirms the authority of both divine law-giving (the Qurʾān and the Sunnah) and human speculation regarding the Law. Where passages of Qurʾān and/or the Ḥadīths are ambiguous, the school seeks guidance of Qiyās (analogical reasoning). The Ijmā' (consensus of scholars or of the community) was "accepted but not stressed". The school rejected the dependence on local traditions as the source of legal precedent and rebuffed the Ahl al-Ra'y (personal opinion) and the Istiḥsān (juristic discretion).
The Shafiʽi school was widely followed in the Middle East until the rise of the Ottomans and the Safavids. Traders and merchants helped to spread Shafiʽi Islam across the Indian Ocean, as far India and the Southeast Asia. The Shafiʽi school is now predominantly found in parts of the Hejaz and the Levant, Lower Egypt and Yemen, and among the Kurdish people, in the Caucasus and across the Indian Ocean (Horn of Africa and the Swahili Coast in Africa and coastal South Asia and Southeast Asia).
Principles
The fundamental principle of the Shafiʽi thought depends on the idea that "to every act performed by a believer who is subject to the Law there corresponds a statute belonging to the Revealed Law or the Shari'a". This statute is either presented as such in the Qurʾān or the Sunnah or it is possible, by means of analogical reasoning (Qiyas), to infer it from the Qurʾān or the Sunnah.
Al-Shafiʽi was the first jurist to insist that Ḥadīth were the decisive source of law (over traditional doctrines of earlier thoughts). In order of priority, the sources of jurisprudence according to the Shafiʽi thought, are:
The Foundation (al asl)
The school rejected dependence on local community practice as the source of legal precedent.
Ma'qul al-asl
The concept of Istishab was first introduced by the later Shafiʽi scholars. Al-Shafiʽi  also postulated that "penal sanctions lapse in cases where repentance precedes punishment".
Risālah
The groundwork legal text for the Shafiʽi law is the Risālah ("the Message"), composed by Al-Shafiʽi in Egypt. It outlines the principles of Shafiʽi legal thought as well as the derived jurisprudence. A first version of the Risālah, "al-Risalah al-Qadima", produced by Al-Shafiʽi  during his stay in Baghdad, is currently lost.
Differences from Mālikī and Ḥanafī thoughts
Al-Shāfiʿī fundamentally criticised the concept of judicial conformism (the Istiḥsan).
With Mālikī view
With Ḥanafī view
History
Al-Shāfiʿī (c. 767–820 AD) visited most of the great centres of Islamic jurisprudence in the Middle East during the course of his travels and amassed a comprehensive knowledge of the different ways of legal theory. He was a student of scholars Mālik ibn Anas, the founder of the Mālikī school of law, and Muḥammad Shaybānī, the great Ḥanafī intellectual in Baghdad.
Under Ottomans and the Safavids
Distribution
The Shafiʽi school is presently predominant in the following parts of the world:
The Shafiʽi school is one of the largest school of Sunni madhhabs by number of adherents. The demographic data by each fiqh, for each nation, is unavailable and the relative demographic size are estimates.
Notable Shafiʽis
Contemporary Shafiʽi scholars
From Middle East and North Africa:
From Southeast Asia:
From South Asia: