Sky blue
Sky blue is a shade of light blue comparable to that of a clear daytime sky. The term (as "sky blew") is attested from 1681. A 1585 translation of Nicolas de Nicolay's 1576 Les navigations, peregrinations et voyages faicts en la Turquie includes "the tulbant [turban] of the merchant must be skie coloured".


Displayed at right is the web colour sky blue.
Variations
Celeste
Celeste (Spanish: [θeˈleste, se-], Italian: [tʃeˈlɛste], English: /sɪˈlɛst/) is the colloquial name for the pale turquoise blue colour. The same word, meaning "of the sky", is used in Spanish and Italian for the colour.  In English, this colour may also be referred to as Italian sky blue. The Japanese equivalent is known as sora iro or mizuiro, referring to the colour of the sky or its reflection on the sea.
Bleu celeste ("sky blue") is a rarely occurring tincture in heraldry (not being one of the seven main colours or metals or the three "staynard colours").  This tincture is sometimes also called ciel or simply celeste.  It is depicted in a lighter shade than the range of shades of the more traditional tincture azure, which is the standard blue used in heraldry.
Gradations
The Italian Wikipedia cites Il dizionario dei colori: nomi e valori in quadricromia by S.Fantetti and C.Petracchi and describes multiple variants of Celeste as shown below, plus details as defined in the infobox above.
Light sky blue
Displayed at right is the web colour light sky blue.  It is close in shade to baby blue.
Medium sky blue
Displayed at right is the colour medium sky blue. This is the colour that is called sky blue in Crayola crayons. This colour was formulated by Crayola in 1958.
"Sky blue" appears in the 32, 48, 64, 96 and 120 packs of crayons.
Vivid sky blue
Displayed at right is the colour vivid sky blue.
Deep sky blue
Deep sky blue is an azure-cyan colour associated with deep shade of sky blue.
Deep sky blue is a web colour.
This is the colour on the colour wheel (RGB/HSV colour wheel) halfway between azure and cyan.
The colour name deep sky blue came into use with the formulization of the X11 colour names over 1985–1989. 
The normalized colour coordinates for deep sky blue are identical to Capri, which first came into use as a colour name in English in 1920.
French sky blue
At right is displayed the colour French sky blue, which is the tone of sky blue that is called sky blue (bleu ciel) in the Pourpre.com colour list, a colour list widely popular in France.
Spanish sky blue
Spanish sky blue is the colour that is called celeste (the Spanish word for "sky blue") in the Guía de coloraciones (Guide to colourations) by Rosa Gallego and
Juan Carlos Sanz, a colour dictionary published in 2005 that is widely popular in the Hispanophone realm.
Dark sky blue
Displayed at right is the colour dark sky blue.
This is the colour called sky blue in Pantone.
The source of this colour is the "Pantone Textile Paper eXtended (TPX)" colour list, color #14-4318 TPX—Sky Blue.
In culture