Sydney Sweeney
Sydney Bernice Sweeney (born September 12, 1997) is an American actress. She first gained attention for appearing in the television series Everything Sucks! (2018), The Handmaid's Tale (2018), and Sharp Objects (2018). In 2019, she featured in Quentin Tarantino's film Once Upon a Time in Hollywood.
Sweeney has starred as Cassie Howard in the HBO teen drama series Euphoria since 2019 and played a sardonic teenager in The White Lotus in 2021. For her roles in them, Sweeney received two Primetime Emmy Awards nominations in 2022, the former for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Drama Series and the latter for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Limited or Anthology Series or Movie.
Early life
Sweeney was born on September 12, 1997, in Spokane, Washington, to Lisa (née  Mudd) and Steven Sweeney. Her mother is a lawyer and her father works in the medical field. She has a brother, Trent. Sweeney was raised in northwestern Idaho in the state's Panhandle region along the Washington border, at a rural lakeside home that her family has inhabited for five generations. Sweeney has said she has a "religious family".
Sweeney attended Saint George's School in Spokane. She was active in numerous athletics: "I was in every single sport possible", she said. "I was on the soccer team, the baseball team, the snow slalom ski team, I was wakeboarding." Sweeney also studied multiple languages and graduated with top grades. She became interested in acting after auditioning to be an extra in an independent film that was shooting in the Spokane area. To convince her parents to allow her to pursue acting, she presented them with a five-year business plan. Sweeney began to audition and book commercial acting jobs in Seattle and Portland, Oregon, where the family temporarily resided, until choosing to relocate to Los Angeles when she was 14 years old.
Career
Early work
Sweeney began her career as guest star in TV shows such as 90210, Criminal Minds, Grey's Anatomy and Pretty Little Liars.
Sweeney starred as Emaline Addario on the Netflix series Everything Sucks!, which revolved around two groups of high school students in Oregon in 1996. She then appeared in the HBO miniseries Sharp Objects, recurring as Alice, a roommate whom Amy Adams's character meets at a psychiatric facility. Her character was originally supposed to have a smaller role, but the director kept bringing her in for more scenes. For the role, Sweeney studied stories of girls who suffered from mental illness and self-harming, and visited hospitals who had patients who self-harmed. She filmed Everything Sucks! and Sharp Objects concurrently, the former during the week and latter on weekends.
Sweeney had a role in the thriller film Under the Silver Lake in 2018. She had a recurring role during the second season of the dystopian drama series The Handmaid's Tale as Eden Spencer, a pious and obedient girl from the totalitarian Republic of Gilead. She also starred as the heroine in the horror film Along Came the Devil. The next year, Sweeney appeared in the drama film Clementine, the coming-of-age film Big Time Adolescence, and Quentin Tarantino's dramedy Once Upon a Time in Hollywood.
2019–present: Breakthrough and mainstream recognition
Since 2019, Sweeney has portrayed teenager Cassie Howard in the drama series Euphoria, to widespread acclaim, receiving a nomination for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Drama Series in 2022. She starred in the TV film Nocturne in 2020. In 2021, Sweeney appeared in the first season of Mike White's anthology black comedy series The White Lotus, receiving critical acclaim for the role. She was nominated for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Limited or Anthology Series or Movie in 2022. Her accomplishments earned her a place on the Time 100 Next list for 2022.
Sweeney will next star in the superhero film Madame Web, set in the Sony's Spider-Man Universe (SSU) franchise.
Personal life
Sweeney has trained in mixed martial arts since she was 12 years old, and competed in grappling in high school. Sweeney owns a 1969 Ford Bronco, which she detailed her restoration of on her TikTok account.