Television content rating system
Television content rating systems are systems for evaluating the content and reporting the suitability of television programs for minors. Many countries have their own television rating system and countries' rating processes vary by local priorities. Programs are rated by the organization that manages the system, the broadcaster, or the content producers.
A rating is usually set for each individual episode of a television series. The rating can change per episode, network, rerun, and country. As such, program ratings are usually not meaningful unless when and where the rating is used is mentioned.
Comparison table
A comparison of current television content rating systems, showing age on the horizontal axis. Note however that the specific criteria used in assigning a classification can vary widely from one country to another. Thus a color code or age range cannot be directly compared from one country to another.
Key:
Use
Argentina
In Argentina, the content rating system is identical to those used by the local film bureau.
Starting from September 2010, it is compulsory for broadcasters to show the plaque Comienza el horario apto para todo público (English: Start time of suitable for all age schedule) and Finaliza el horario apto para todo público (English: End time of suitable for all age schedule) at 6:00 a.m. or 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. or 10:30 p.m. respectively. In addition, the plaque Atención: Contenido no apto para niños, niñas y adolescentes (English: Warning: Content not suitable for children and adolescents) is shown before news broadcasts.
Armenia
A television content rating system for Armenia was introduced in June 2006 (first tested in Yerevan in January 2006). The Armenian ratings are as follows:
Range specific
Age specific
Standard ratings
Classifications are intended to be equivalent to the Australian Classification Board (ACB) classifications of the same name. They're usually presented with the same shape and sometimes colour as their ACB counterparts.
Adult "Pay Per View" only
R 18+ and X 18+ restricted classifications are not permitted for free-to-air broadcast in Australia. Many R 18+ movies on DVD/Blu-ray are often edited on Free TV/cable networks, to secure an MA 15+ classification or lower. Some movies that were classified R 18+ on DVD have since been aired on Australian TV with an MA 15+ classification.
Consumer advice
Consumer advice is compulsory for all MA 15+ and one-off programmes, as well as very short series classified M or higher (such as feature films, miniseries and documentaries). When a programme carries consumer advice, appropriate abbreviations are displayed along with the classification symbol after each commercial break. In general, these abbreviations are as follows:
For violence, coarse language and sex scenes, the intensity and/or frequency is mentioned in front of the consumer advice. These include: "mild", "stylised", "some", "frequent" or "strong". Example: "strong sex scenes".
Brazil
A television content rating system in Brazil was implemented following a consultation in 2006. Since then, the television networks themselves rate the shows, while the advisory rating (Portuguese: Classificação Indicativa) judges the content to guarantee that the rating is appropriate for that specific show. On broadcast networks, where the system is mandatory, the ratings are also translated in Brazilian Sign Language, and may also carry content descriptors. The icons must be shown at the start of each block of the show, and their respective promos.
All rating is advisory unlike films. The Brazilian content rating system utilizes age-specific classifications (with the exception of L-rated programming), and consist of the following:
Bulgaria
All television stations show the rating during the broadcast in Bulgaria.
In the current system there are five rating categories:
Canada
The Canadian TV Classification System was created in late 1997 for English-language programs to use, which lined up with those of the American v-chip, both matching that system and allowing television manufacturers to use the same backbone firmware for both systems. The upper-right corner of symbols are shaped like the corner of a maple leaf, as is used in the national flag, and are rendered in black and white. The icons are intended to be shown once an hour lasting 15 seconds, although in the case of longer programs that do not start on the hour, some broadcasters show the rating at the start and at the top of each subsequent clock hour, while others show the rating at the start and again precisely one hour later. However, there are some networks like Global that only display the television rating at the beginning of the show. The icons are displayed in the upper-left corner and the size is mandated to be a minimum of 52 scan lines or pixels tall, and must also fully cover an American ratings icon if burned-in or broadcast live by an American broadcaster.
Additionally, should a program contain content potentially unsuitable for some viewers, such as violence, coarse language, or nudity, members of the self-regulating Canadian Broadcast Standards Council (which does not include the CBC, although it still uses such warnings) are required to air a disclaimer at the beginning of the program and at the end of each commercial break, advising viewer discretion (such disclaimers are only required for the first hour if airing after 9:00 p.m.). This disclaimer is technically required even if the final commercial break comes immediately before the closing credits, and some (but not all) channels in fact observe this.
Notably, the television rating given may depend on the level of cable and satellite, or if the program is broadcast over-the-air. Also, television ratings are generally considered more restrictive than movie ratings.
English-language ratings
The Canadian rating system for English-language broadcasters (as well as third-language broadcasters, which broadcast in a language other than English or French) is as follows:
French-language (Québécois) ratings
French-language broadcasters use a rating system that is virtually identical to Quebec's Régie du cinéma's film rating system, with one additional category (8+):
Chile
The (National Association of Television) devised a content rating system in 1993.
Child specific
Standard ratings
Exhibition of programmes classified with the "A" rating is only allowed from 10 p.m. until 7 a.m. (both in local time); however, most channels only broadcast these programmes until they closedown their daily broadcasts (as they still don't begin permanent 24/7 services). All TV channels are required to show a warning (either as a full-screen identification or as a scrolling text message in a lower-third format, if shown during programming) when adult programming on the channel begins. The only exception to that rule applies to cable TV channels.
Colombia
Since 1997, Colombian television networks are required to specify programmes within dubbed family and adult fringes, and must display a notice signifying the audience, both visually and in narration, the minimum age required to watch the programme, if it contains sexual or violent content, and if parental company is needed at the beginning of every programme. The networks must also air an 'institutional message' daily at 21:00, inviting children 12 years of age or less to "not to stay exposed to contents which have no essentially child[-oriented] nature." A message must be broadcast at 22:10, Monday through Friday, (22:30 Saturdays and Sundays) stating to viewers that the adult fringe has started. Most networks opt to display a scrolling text message instead.
The ratings are as follows:
Pornography is prohibited from being transmitted over the air in Colombia, even in the adult fringes.
Croatia
In Croatia, television networks show the rating during the broadcast. The Hrvatska Radiotelevizija (Croatian Radiotelevision) channels, RTL Televizija, RTL 2, Nova TV and Doma TV all display warnings before a broadcast not meant for a general audience. Broadcasts meant for all audiences do not have a rating. With that in mind, the rating system is the following:
Cyprus
In Cyprus, television networks displays warnings before a broadcast not meant for a general audience. Broadcasts meant for all audiences do not have a rating. With that in mind, the rating system is the following:
Czech Republic
On Czech television, programmes with potentially shocking or harmful content could air only between 10:00pm and 6am and with a star-shaped marker on either corner of the screen indicating it was for adults.
Denmark
Since 1 September 2020, the Medierådet for Børn og Unge (Media Council for Children and Young People) classifies all programs and films for television broadcast and video on demand release, using the same rating also used for theatrically released films and home media releases. On television, the age limit must be informed orally before the program starts or continues. The clear rating should be shown during the entire transmission time or a minimum first five minutes, and must be available in program listings. Films and series on VOD services must have age ratings and mention the content in them that explains why the content was given its rating. The location of the rating is up to the individual provider as long as it is visible to the consumer before choosing a film or program. The new television classification system only applies to domestic television and VOD services such as DR, TV 2, TV3, Kanal 4 and Viaplay, and as such do not apply to foreign services such as Netflix, HBO Max or Disney+. The requirements apply to all programming outside of news & current affairs, music, sports, live telecasts, instructional & leisure programs, programming of nonprofit, political or religious nature, preface of programs and teaching & research programs.
The ratings are:
Ecuador
Article 65 of the Communications Law of Ecuador presents the following classification:
The classification to which belongs each programme will be arranged by the Consejo de Regulación y Desarrollo de la Información y Comunicación (Regulatory and Development Council of Information and Communication) depending on the parameters which are considered relevant.
El Salvador
The Dirección de Espectáculos Públicos, Radio y Televisión (Direction of Public Shows, Radio and Television), entity attached to the Ministerio de Gobernación y Desarrollo Territorial (Ministry of Interior and Territorial Development), regulates the contents exhibited in Salvadoran television.
Finland
A content rating system was introduced for Finnish television broadcasts in 2004. The initial ratings system for television programmes shown on Finnish television channels consists of the following:
If a programme is classified as 'K16' or 'K18', a notification must be shown before broadcast.
France
A content rating system in French is regulated by the Conseil supérieur de l'audiovisuel (CSA). Each rating icon is translucent and, as of December 2012, is shown for the whole duration of the show.
There initially was no ratings system for French television. In March 1961, following the broadcast of a film where a female nude was briefly visible, the "white square" was introduced. A white square, replaced by a white rectangle in 1964, was displayed in the corner of the screen. An off-screen voice warned at the beginning of the program that it was unsuitable for all audiences. This system continued until 1996 when the Conseil supérieur de l'audiovisuel replaced it with a system of five pictograms, indicating the suitability of the program. This system was replaced by the current system on 18 November 2002.
Germany
In Germany, every broadcaster has to show a disclaimer displaying the sentence Die nachfolgende Sendung ist für Zuschauer unter 16/18 Jahren nicht geeignet before transmission if the programme contains potentially offensive content. This roughly translates to The following programme is not suitable for viewers under 16/18. The Freiwillige Selbstkontrolle Fernsehen (FSF) checks many shows in private television.
Greece
A new content rating system in Greece was introduced on 30 September 2019. The system is now associated with the age of viewers and has new visual symbols (replacing rhombus, circle, triangle, square and cross symbols), however, there are no mature-accompanied ratings compared to the previous system. The ratings are compulsory and are displayed and verbally announced at the beginning of each broadcast. These provisions are enforced by the Greek National Council for Radio and Television (ESR).
Also, programmes suitable for ages 12 and up will be accompanied by a special word marker identifying their content, which is divided into the following four categories:
Hong Kong
The Hong Kong television rating system is since by generic code of television programmes standard of the Broadcasting Ordinance (Cap.562) on 11 December 1995. The current ratings are:
Hungary
The Hungarian content rating system has changed frequently. The ratings of the programmes broadcast often caused legal interferences, since the radio and television authorities have stricter guidelines about age appropriate rating categories for programs. If a programme is not marked with the television authority's choice of rating symbol, the airing channel often has to pay large penalties to Hungarian authorities. Broadcasters licensed in another country may have a different rating system than the one used in Hungary, or have no ratings. For example, Discovery Communications' channels used Dutch ratings, TV2's sister channels, DIGI's self-packaged educational channels, and before 2015, RTL Klub's sister channels all used the Romanian ratings, while ViacomCBS' Hungarian TV channels (such as Comedy Central, Comedy Central Family, and the Paramount Network) had no ratings although before airing a show not suitable for children, a channel will show a full-screen voiced-over slide and have a star-like icon in the top-right corner for a whole duration of a show. AMC's channels do the similar thing as ViacomCBS did. International broadcasters also do not have ratings.
The earliest symbolic classification system was first used by the now-defunct TV channel, Msat in the late-1990s. These ratings is applicable only for films shown on TV. After Msat was shut down, commercial broadcaster TV2 have used that system while the public broadcaster MTV and commercial broadcaster RTL Klub (in addition to TV2's system) had used full-screen voiced-over slides before films, similar in function to the system used by TV2. These symbols are shown for a minute after a film had started, although in TV2, these symbols had also shown for a few seconds before the film begins.
The earliest classification symbols are:
In 2002, a new rating system was devised, replacing the symbolic system. Ranking programmes and displaying the rating symbols became compulsory on every Hungarian television network. The new rating system caused trouble within these networks because the channels were required to display the ranking symbols during the entire duration of their programmes. The symbols were distracting to viewers, and networks feared that their constant presence could damage the television screen. Due to the complaints, the television authority allowed channels to choose to show the rating symbols on the left or on the right side of the screen. Later, channels were also allowed to increase the transparency of the symbols.
In the system used between 2002 and 2010, there are four rating categories:
The rating system was overhauled in 2010 by introducing the new classifications: the 6 rating and the optional GY rating, changing the 12 classification and renewing the looks of the symbols themselves.
In the current system, there are five rating categories:
Similar ratings also apply to films shown in cinemas, however unlike in other countries a viewer cannot be denied access from entering a screening if they are not the age of the rating.
Since July 8, 2021, because of the hungarian LGBT-law, several Hungarian channels - just like RTL Klub and TV2 - have also began to use these ratings on their commercial breaks.
There was also formerly an X rating: however, due to a law change on October 1, 2022, X-rated content can no longer be aired on Hungarian Television. One notably X-rated film is Lewis. Before an X-rated film, the following must be said:
.
India
In February 2013, in the wake of controversy over suspension of exhibition of the film Vishwaroopam, the Ministry of Information & Broadcasting constituted a panel under the Chairmanship of Justice (Retd.) Mukul Mudgal to examine issues of film certification under the Cinematograph Act 1952. One of the terms of reference for the committee is to examine "the requirement of special categories of certification for the purposes of broadcasting on television channels and radio stations." But, the committee had not made any recommendations on this important matter.
The current classifications of films in India are as follows:
Indonesia
The Indonesian Broadcasting Commission (KPI) regulate broadcast television content that classifies television programme into several classifications:
Israel
Italy
Italy has no unified classification for TV content. The classification system changes according to each station and is not legally binding. The first group to introduce the TV rating system was Mediaset in 1994, initially only on Canale 5. Italia 1 and Rete 4 adopted the rating system in 1997, while the thematic channels adopted it in 2009. Given the simplicity of the classification system, inspired by traffic lights, the other broadcasters also followed the example of Mediaset. The ratings adopted by Mediaset are the following:
Programmes with the red label can be blocked by parental control.
RAI introduced the TV rating system in October 2000, with a flashing red logo to indicate programmes that are suitable only for adults. In 2007 the classification system was expanded with new logos: red if the program is suitable only for adults and yellow if the parental guidance is suggested for  children.
The classifications used by Sky Italia are instead the following:
Programmes can be blocked by parental control.
Lithuania
All television stations show the rating during the broadcast in Lithuania.
Broadcasts meant for all audiences do not have a rating.
With that in mind, the rating system is the following:
Malaysia
In Malaysia, a television rating system was revised in January 2012. Ratings are shown before the programme starts.
The classifications are as follows:
Mexico
The classification system of television programmes in Mexico is almost equivalent to that of the movie rating system of the country, and consists of the following:
Morocco
The classification system of television programmes in Morocco is established by the HACA. There are 4 categories. Before the airing of the program, an off-screen voice warned at the beginning of the programme that it was unsuitable for all audiences.
Netherlands
The television rating system in the Netherlands was created in 2001 by the Dutch Institute for the Classification of Audiovisual Media (NICAM) and is known as Kijkwijzer (ViewingGuide or WatchWiser). The same rating systems are used for both television programmes and films, and serve partly as guidelines (Programmes with the classification 12, 14 and 16 years may only be broadcast from 8pm and with the classification 18 years from midnight. Cinemas and theaters in the country cannot provide films with the classification 16 years to people under the age of 16). They are the same as Dutch film ratings.
The following age ratings apply:
There are also six descriptor icons used:
New Zealand
On 1 May 2020, New Zealand realigned its television content rating system to a common system for free-to-air television, subscription television and on-demand services:
The last three ratings replaced the former AO (Adults Only) classification.
On free-to-air television, programmes classified M can be broadcast between 9.00am and 3.00pm on weekdays (school term time only, as designated by the Ministry of Education) and from 7.30pm until 5.00am on a daily basis. Programmes classified 16 can only be broadcast after the 8.30pm watershed, while programmes classified 18 can only be broadcast after 9.30pm.
On pay television, where content filtering is not available, programmes classified 18 can only be broadcast between 8.00pm and 6.00am on a daily basis and from 9.00am until 3.00pm on weekdays (school term time only). If content filtering is available, programmes classified 18 can be broadcast at any time. Explicit adult sex programmes classified 18 may screen only on premium channels.
The following descriptor codes (audience advisories) may be added for programmes classified PG or higher:
North Macedonia
North Macedonia uses these symbols for each programming. Broadcasts meant for all audiences do not have a rating.
With that in mind, the rating system is the following:
The symbols are put in the lower-left or lower right corner on screen.
Norway
A television content rating system was introduced in Norway in July 2015. Television broadcasters are obliged to classify their programmes in the following age categories: A (all ages), 6 years, 9 years, 12 years, 15 years or 18 years. The classification must be based on the guidelines made by The Norwegian Media Authority. Programmes in the different age categories must be transmitted according to the following time schedule during the day:
Television broadcasters shall specify the age limit acoustically before the programme starts or clearly mark the programme with an age limit throughout its duration. Television broadcasters shall also specify the age limit in programme schedules and electronic programme guides.
The age categories are also applicable to other platforms such as Video on demand-services, videogrammes (DVD, Blu-ray) and cinema theatres.
Peru
The age rating system in Peru was introduced in 2005 by the then-President Alejandro Toledo and came into force for both radio and television broadcasts. Currently, the only free-to-air channels advising their audiences about the rating system are ATV, NexTV and La Tele, since most channels adopted their own system since 2009, starting with América Televisión.
The ratings for television programmes are available on some Peruvian channels. The rating system used in Peru is listed below.
Philippines
In the Philippines, the Movie and Television Review and Classification Board, commonly known as MTRCB, implements and regulates local television content rating systems. In 1979, it only had implemented two television ratings: "General Viewership" (GV) later renamed (General Patronage/GP) in 1995 and "Parental Guidance" (PG), in the mid-1990s up until from now on, some advisories are simply written on the upper left side or at the lower right side of the television screen.
On 6 October 2011, in order to encourage parents to supervise and be responsible with their children in watching television, the MTRCB revamped its rating system, implementing a three-tiered system:
The new ratings was originally to have been a four-tiered system, composed of G (General Patronage), PG (Parental Guidance), SPG (Strong Parental Guidance), and M, but some time before the implementation of the new system, the "M" rating was dropped.
The new ratings system is similar to the old one, but the look and the ratings themselves was completely revamped. All of these were only been implemented on Free to-Air Television stations. The new system consists of a new full-screen advisory of the programme's rating which is played before each programme, whatever the rating of such programme is, except in the case of programmes with SPG rating, wherein the rating must be aired twice (before the start of the programme and after each commercial break. e.g. in the middle part of the programme). A rating logo then appears at the bottom right of the screen during a programme if it was rated as such. Sometimes, when annotations are to be put and it takes the place of the logo, then it has to be put on the upper left side of the screen, opposite the logo of the TV station.
On 9 February 2012, the SPG rating was implemented, which utilizes at least one of the following content descriptors:
The SPG rating was first broadcast on the film Cinco which was aired in ABS-CBN, where it had its old advisory.
Poland
Before 2000, Poland did not have any uniform classification system for television programmes. Some stations, however, applied their own system of signs: in front of the selected films TVP board applied the "Adult only" or "Film for adult audiences only". In Canal+ before the film to show in chart with key Canal+ in the appropriate colour (green, yellow, red). Until 27 February 2000, TVN decided to mark the so-called "adult movies" with a pulsating red 18+ logo. On 1 March 2000, an agreement was reached with Polish television broadcasters as "Friendly media" in order to introduce a uniform system of classification of television programmes. Nine television broadcasters - TVP, Polsat, TVN, Nasza TV, Canal+, Wizja TV, Polish Cable Television and TV Niepokalanow - had signed the agreement.
The current Polish television rating system was introduced on 15 August 2005 and consists of five icons. The icons need to be broadcast which threw the entire duration of the programme. On 28 August 2011 changed the appearance of the characters:
Portugal
For a long time, the only existing regulation on Portuguese television was that programmes with potentially shocking or harmful content could air only between 10:30pm and 6am and with a red circular marker on the top-right corner of the screen indicating it was for audiences aged 16 and over.
In 2006, all free-to-air networks decided to complement this rule with a shared, more detailed rating system for TV shows:
These logos must be shown during 10 seconds in the beginning of any programme and after every break. If a programme is rated 16, it can only be broadcast between 10:30pm and 6am. However, most cable channels in Portugal use the Spanish classification system.
Republic of Moldova
In the Republic of Moldova, the rating system is identical to the one used in Romania, as follows:
Romania
The Romanian content rating system has changed frequently. The ratings of the programmes broadcast often caused legal interferences, since the radio and television authorities have stricter guidelines about age appropriate rating categories for programs. If a programme is not marked with the television authority's choice of rating symbol, the airing channel often has to pay large penalties to Romanian authorities, except with 24h all-news channels, 24h advertising channels (teleshopping), pay television or pay-per-view channels (like Eurosport, HBO, etc.) and foreign broadcasting TV-channels (like TV5Monde, Deutsche Welle, arte, etc.) that are subjected to foreign audio-visual regulations from their country of origin.
The first rating symbols were adopted on May 2, 2000, as follows:
Few television networks (such as Antena 1 or Prima TV) used the same symbols, but in a green, yellow or red ring with a transparent symbol.
In 2002, a new rating system was devised. Ranking programmes and displaying the rating symbols became compulsory on every Romanian television network. The new rating system caused trouble within these networks, because the channels were required to display the ranking symbols during the entire duration of their programmes. The symbols were distracting to viewers, and networks feared that their constant presence could damage the television screen. Due to the complaints, the television authority allowed channels to choose to show the rating symbols on the left or on the right side of the screen. Later, channels were also allowed to increase the transparency of the symbols.
The current rating symbols were adopted in September 2002. On July 12, 2005, the symbols became transparent.
In this system, the rating symbols are as follows:
Russia
The rating system for programmes and films shown on Russian television:
These logos are shown in the beginning of the programme and after every break.
Singapore
Singapore has adopted the use of TV Ratings from 21 October 2011. They consist of PG and PG13 ratings for Free-to-Air TV and NC16 and M18 ratings in addition to the PG and PG13 ratings for Pay TV channels. For Free-to-Air TV, the shows rated PG may be aired anytime while PG13 should air between 10pm to 6am. For Pay TV, PG13 rated programmes can be shown anytime. Before the rated programme starts the TV channels will show a notification. From now on, only StarHub TV's and Singtel TV's self-packaged non-regional Pay TV channels ( e.g. StarHub TV's E City and Sensasi and Singtel TV's FashionTV HD and FashionTV HD on Demand, both of which features modeling nudity in certain programmes ) are enabled to carry NC16 and M18 rated content. FashionTV is also Singapore's first official M18 rated channel. M18 rated programmes can only be telecasted from 10pm onwards to 6am on Pay TV. Regional channels like Fox Life, Fox Movies and HBO Asia are unable to carry Media Development Authority's film ratings as they are targeted at the same region (a certain group of Asia territories), which results in programmes being subjected to external censorship of a much harsher nature outside Singapore territorial control. Only Video on Demand (VOD) Pay TV services are allowed to carry R21 content currently. G-rated programmes are not required to show a notification for any channel.
Slovakia
Slovakian government accepted a law in 2001 (updated in 2007), in which television stations are required to display one of the following icons during all the program and in promos:
Additional icons used only for educational content:
For content suitable for all children, a green  "U" icon is available, but broadcasters are not required to use it. Programming suitable for all ages doesn't show a rating at all.
Until 2007, all ratings went with faces: green smiley face - all viewers; orange sad face - suitable for 7, 12, 15 years and over; red very sad face - suitable for adults only.
Slovenia
Slovenian government accepted a law in 2004, in which television stations are required to play a voiceover and age icon warning, which has to be at least 10 seconds long before programmes, inappropriate for some audiences begin. Additionally, one of the following icons (a white rhombus with the age number) has to be displayed for the duration of the programme:
The original content rating icons (used before 2014) were a red triangle with a stylised eye for content rated +15, while adult-only content used a red circle with a stylised eye.
Sometimes, age rating symbols are accompanied by additional symbols, which are not shown on-screen and warn the audience of the type of inappropriate content:
Programmes, appropriate for all audiences do not have a rating.
The public broadcaster RTV Slovenija and most other broadcasters use three watersheds. 12+ rated content is shown between 8 PM and 5 AM, 15+ rated programmes are allowed between 10 PM and 5 AM, and adult-only content can be shown between midnight and 5 AM. Cartoons and children's programmes are screened until 7 PM.
South Africa
South African ratings are issued and certified by the Film and Publication Board, whilst the National Broadcasting Commission regulates the various films and programmes. All television stations, cinemas and distributors of DVD, video and computer games must display the following signage:
Additional symbols:
South Korea
The South Korean television rating system has been in force since 2000, and it started with only four classifications which are All, 7, 13 and 19. In February 2001, all programs except domestic dramas (which had been enforced since November 2002) has required to have a rating system. In 2007, rating 13 was changed into 12 and a new rating, 15 is introduced. Most programmes have to be rated, except the "exempt" rating below. Even if it qualifies for being exempt, a broadcaster may apply a rating.
Rating icons may be transparent, and can be positioned either on the upper-left or upper-right corner of the screen. The icon has a size of at least 1/20 of the screen, and has black writing on a yellow circle with a white outline. These icons are shown for 30 seconds when the programme starts, and are shown again every 10 minutes, and when the programme resumes after commercial breaks. This does not apply to 19-rated programmes, where the icon must be visible throughout the entire programme. These regulations do not apply to the "All" rating, as it does not have an icon. A rating disclaimer is displayed on the start of the programme for five seconds stating "This programme is prohibited for children under the age of X, so parental accompaniment is required" (이 프로그램은 X세 미만의 어린이/청소년이 시청하기에 부적절하므로 보호자의 시청지도가 필요한 프로그램입니다, I peurogeuraemeun X-se mimanui eorini/cheongsonyeoni sicheonghagi-e bujeokjeolhameuro bohoja-ui sicheongjidoga piryohan peurogeuraemimnida.) for 7, 12, and 15 ratings. "All" and "19" ratings have a different disclaimer, which say "This programme is suitable for all ages" (이 프로그램은 모든 연령의 시청자가 시청할 수 있는 프로그램입니다, I peurogeuraemeun modeun yeollyeong-ui sicheongjaga sicheonghal su inneun peurogeuraemimnida.) and "This programme is prohibited for children under the age of 19" (이 프로그램은 19세 미만의 청소년이 시청하기에 부적절한 프로그램입니다, I peurogeuraemeun sipguse mimanui cheongsonyeoni sicheonghagi-e bujeokjeolhan peurogeuraemimnida.) respectively.
These ratings are used by all South Korean television broadcasters. Despite being intended for viewing outside of the country, KBS World also uses these ratings.
South Korean television ratings do not include content descriptors or advisories as they do in other nations. The ratings are therefore used in a broader sense.
Spain
Unrated programmes do not display any icon on the screen; in Catalonia, TP-rated shows do not show any icon as well. Nowadays rating symbols are shown during all the programme and in promos; each channel has its right to choose its design and where it has to be placed. The "Infantil" rating it's the exception, because it appears during the first five seconds. In Catalonia, only the 13, 16 and 18 ratings remain transparent in the screen, while the others (7, 10 and 12) are seen during the first 30 seconds.
Taiwan
Taiwanese rating system for television programmes was introduced on 1 January 1999 with four symbols represented with four Chinese characters 普 for General, 護 for Protected, 輔 for Parental Guidance and 限 for Restricted, but changed on 13 June 2017 to unify the television age rating with Taiwan's video game and motion picture ratings, and there are five symbols,
Television programmes free of circumstances listed in the preceding four articles and suitable for watching by general audiences may be listed as G .
The images of news reports shall conform to the provisions of "G" rate.
Television programmes free of circumstances listed in the preceding three articles but portraying any one of the following circumstances shall be listed as P.
Television programmes free of circumstances listed in the preceding two articles but portraying any one of the following circumstances shall be listed as PG-12.
Television programmes free of circumstances listed in Article 4 but portraying any one of the following circumstances shall be listed as PG-15.
Television programmes portraying any one of the following circumstances shall be listed as R and be broadcast by encryption.
Thailand
In Thailand, a television rating system was introduced in 2006 alongside a movie rating system for movies. In September 2013, the television rating was revised.
Under the new guideline, the so-called 'Free TV' channels have to label their programs and reschedule their shows to comply in the following categories:
TV programs in Thailand are already labeled by a certain system of categories, a practice criticised by rights group as nanny-state censorship and ridiculed by some Netizens for its confusing standards.
Turkey
The TV content rating system in Turkey was introduced by RTÜK in 2006. The ratings are the following:
News programmes, sports competitions, religious ceremonies and commercial communication broadcasts are exempt from the content rating system.
Ukraine
The Ukrainian TV content rating system was adopted on 15 September 2003. It started with three classifications (●, ▲, ■). On 6 May 2016, the classifications were replaced, and TV shows that do not have age restrictions are not rated. The new ratings are as follows:
These designations must be displayed on the lower right corner of the television screen.
TV Parental Guidelines
The TV parental guidelines were first proposed on December 19, 1996, as a voluntary-participation system—in which ratings are determined by participating broadcast and cable networks—by the United States Congress, the television industry and the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), and went into effect by January 1, 1997, on most major broadcast and cable networks in response to concerns from parents and advocacy groups regarding increasingly explicit sexual content, graphic violence and strong profanity in American television programming, and was designed to be used in conjunction with the V-chip, which the U.S. government had mandated to be built into all television sets manufactured from 2000 onward (and the vast majority of cable/satellite set-top boxes). The system—which is used for, including but not limited to, most television series, specials, made-for-television films, and theatrically released films re-edited for broadcast or basic cable telecast—has since been applied to internet-based television services (such as Hulu, Amazon Prime Video and Netflix), digital video retailers (such as Apple’s iTunes Store and Google Play) and digital media players (such as Amazon Fire TV, Apple TV, Android TV and Roku). The guidelines are not assigned to sports or news programs nor are they used during commercial advertisements, outside of promotional ads for network programs.
The rating icons are required to be shown for 15 seconds at the start of each program, although since June 2005, many advertiser-supported network broadcasters and some syndication divisions also display the assigned rating for that particular program after each commercial break; for networks and syndicators that continue to run the rating icon once per hour during a program running longer than 60 minutes, the broadcaster may show the rating again during a segment/scene that starts closest to the top of the next clock hour. Premium channels—in addition to applying them to any offered original programming—may assign Parental Guideline ratings for theatrical or home video-released movies that either did not receive a Motion Picture Association-assigned rating or were aired as an "unrated" cut.
 TV-Y – This program is aimed at a very young audience, including children from ages 2–6.
 TV-Y7 – This program is designed for children age 7 and above.
 TV-G – Most parents would find this program suitable for all ages.
Programs rated TV-G are generally suitable for all ages. The FCC states that "this rating does not signify a program designed specifically for children, most parents may let younger children watch this program unattended." The thematic elements portrayed in programs with this rating contain little or no violence, no strong language, and little or no sexual dialogue or situations.
 TV-PG – Parental guidance is recommended; these programs may be unsuitable for younger children.
 TV-14 – This program contains some material that many parents would find unsuitable for children under 14 years of age.
 TV-MA – This program is intended to be viewed by adults and therefore may be unsuitable for children under 17.
Some thematic elements, according to the FCC, "may call for parental guidance and/or the program may contain one or more of the following" sub-ratings, designated with an alphabetic letter:
Up to four content descriptors can be applied along with an applied rating, depending on the kind of suggestive content featured in a program (with the exception of the "FV" sub-rating, due to its sole applicable use for children's programs). As the rating increases pertaining to the age, the content matters generally get more intensive. The 'suggestive dialogue' descriptor is used for TV-PG and TV-14 rated programs only, although certain networks may choose to rate their TV-MA programs with the descriptor, while the DLSV sub-ratings are only used with the TV-PG and TV-14 ratings.
An additional content descriptor, "E/I", is applied to select TV-Y, TV-Y7, and TV-G programs that are designed to meet the educational and informative needs of children aged 16 and under. A minimum of three hours of E/I-compliant programming must be broadcast per week by each television network; E/I programming must air between 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. to count toward this minimum.
Content advisory ratings (premium cable and pay-per-view)
The American pay television industry uses a separate, unrelated content advisory system—used in conjunction with the TV Parental Guidelines and the Motion Picture Association rating system—that first went into effect on March 1, 1994, on participating cable-originated premium channels and pay-per-view services (led by the system's charter services, HBO, Cinemax, Showtime and The Movie Channel). Inspired by similar content guidelines that had already been included in the services’ monthly program guides, the voluntary-participation system provides guidance to pay-cable subscribers on the suitability of a program for certain audiences based on its content. Thematic material is rated based on a ten-code system, designated with a two- or three-letter abbreviation and corresponding descriptor:
Up to five content descriptors can be applied, alongside the corresponding rating, to an individual program to advise viewers of content that may be inappropriate for minors, depending on age group, or for adults with particular sensitivities to certain kinds of mature content.
Venezuela
Television content in Venezuela is regulated by the Law on Social Responsibility on Radio and Television (Ley de Responsabilidad Social en Radio y Televisión), introduced in January 2003. Free-to-air television broadcasters are required to classify their programmes using the following ratings:
It is mandatory for all Venezuelan television stations to broadcast a short presentation, before the broadcast of any programmes, made by the same channel, where the type of programme (recreational, informational, mixed, etc.), type of production (domestic or national independent) elements include containing (such as language, health, sex and/or violence) and lastly the rating of the programme.