The Looney Tunes Show
The Looney Tunes Show is an American animated sitcom produced by Warner Bros. Animation that ran from May 3, 2011, through August 31, 2014, on Cartoon Network. The series consists of two seasons, each containing 26 episodes, and features characters from the Looney Tunes and Merrie Melodies theatrical cartoon shorts updated for the 21st century.
Initially, the series received mixed reviews from critics, who praised the visual style, humor, portrayal of the characters, and voice acting, but criticized its direction, its divergences from its source material, its lack of slapstick, and its changes to the characters' designs and personalities.
Premise
The series revolves around roommates Bugs Bunny and Daffy Duck living in a suburb with "colorful neighbors" including Lola Bunny, Tina Russo, Porky Pig, Foghorn Leghorn, Elmer Fudd, Sylvester, Tweety, Granny, Gossamer, Yosemite Sam, Taz, Speedy Gonzales, Marvin the Martian, Pete Puma and more. The series contained less slapstick and fewer visual gags, but instead was more adult-oriented and dialogue-driven with love triangles, employment and rooming.
Wraparound segments
The show also features two other segments which wrap around the main plot. These consist of:
Characters
Main
Recurring
Others
Production
The Looney Tunes Show was originally envisioned as Looney Tunes Laff Riot, a "true-to-the-classics" show emulating the original run of Looney Tunes shorts announced in July 2009 by Warner Bros. Animation. However, it was scrapped because the executives were not impressed, and it was later retooled into the sitcom-inspired The Looney Tunes Show which premiered on May 3, 2011, on Cartoon Network.
The show features new character designs by Ottawa-based artist Jessica Borutski which were first created for Looney Tunes Laff Riot and also later retooled for the final series. The Laff Riot pilot would surface on September 4, 2020.
As is standard for most modern animated sitcoms like The Simpsons and Family Guy, the series does not use a laugh track.
The animation was produced by Yearim and Rough Draft Korea, along with Toon City Animation in the first season. The Wile E. Coyote and Road Runner CGI shorts were produced by Crew972.
Cancelation and spin-off film
On July 29, 2014, it was announced that the series would not be renewed for a third season. A direct-to-video spin-off film named Looney Tunes: Rabbits Run was released on August 4, 2015.
Broadcast
The Looney Tunes Show premiered in the United States on May 3, 2011, through August 31, 2014, on Cartoon Network. In Australia, the series began airing on 9Go! and Cartoon Network Australia.
The Looney Tunes Show premiered in Africa on Boomerang Africa on May 17, 2011, in France on Boomerang France, in the UK on Boomerang UK and on different Boomerang feeds throughout Europe.
The Looney Tunes Show premiered in Canada on Teletoon on September 5, 2011.
Home media
The Looney Tunes Show has received home video releases for Season 1. The season 2 episode "Super Rabbit" was released as part of the Looney Tunes: Parodies Collection on February 4, 2020.
The first episode was also released on Looney Tunes: Rabbits Run as a special feature.
Reception
Critical response
Critical reception to The Looney Tunes Show was mixed. The voice acting, humor, portrayal of the characters and style received praise, but the show was also criticized for its direction and lack of slapstick, as well as the designs and personality changes of the characters.
In a 2010 interview with CBC News, series animator Jessica Borutski said in response to fan criticism of the series' new character designs, that the original designs were intended for adults and that "[it is] time for a new generation to meet the characters." Borutski said, "a fresh, new design is the only way to keep characters alive." Cartoon historian Chris Robinson noted also that the mark the original characters have on fans is indelible and that fans are not receptive to change. "[Fans] just really become attached to these things," Robinson said. "It's just so strongly rooted in their childhood that they're unable to separate themselves."
Awards and nominations
The Looney Tunes Show was nominated for three Primetime Emmy Awards.
Music
Two albums compiling songs from the show have been released digitally by WaterTower Music:
Notes