Title
A title is one or more words used before or after a person's name, in certain contexts. It may signify either generation, an official position, or a professional or academic qualification. In some languages, titles may be inserted between the first and last name (for example, Graf in German, Cardinal in Catholic usage (Richard Cardinal Cushing) or clerical titles such as Archbishop). Some titles are hereditary.
Types
Titles include:
Titles in English-speaking areas
Common titles
Controversy around usage of common titles
Some people object to the usage of titles to denote marital status, age or gender. In 2018, a campaign named GoTitleFree was launched to encourage businesses to stop requesting, storing and using marital status titles in their registration forms, and when speaking with customers, launched on the grounds that titles often lead to assumptions about a woman's age or availability for marriage, and exclude non-binary people. This is in line with established practice advocated by the World Wide Web Consortium and the Government Digital Service which sets the standard for UK government online services. This in turn means that titles are optional on UK passports and driving licences.
Familial
Aunt, Auntie, or Uncle may be used as titles by nieces and nephews, or by children to adults whom they know.
Legislative and executive titles
Some job titles of members of the legislature and executive are used as titles.
Aristocratic titles
In the United Kingdom, "Lord" and "Lady" are used as titles for members of the nobility. Unlike titles such as "Mr" and "Mrs", they are not used before first names except in certain circumstances, for example as courtesy titles for younger sons, etc., of peers. In Scotland "Lord of Parliament" and "Lady of Parliament" are the equivalents of Baron and Baroness in England.
Titles used by knights, dames, baronets and baronetesses
These do not confer nobility.
"Sir" and "Dame" differ from titles such as "Mr" and "Mrs" in that they can only be used before a person's first name, and not immediately before their surname.
Judicial titles
Historical
Ecclesiastical titles (Christian)
Titles are used to show somebody's ordination as a priest or their membership in a religious order. Use of titles differs between denominations.
Religious
Priests
Christian priests often have their names prefixed with a title similar to The Reverend.
Used for deceased persons only
Other
Academic titles
Military titles
Military ranks are used before names.
Maritime and seafarer's professions and ranks
The names of shipboard officers, certain shipping line employees and Maritime Academy faculty/staff are preceded by their title when acting in performance of their duties.
Law enforcement
The names of police officers may be preceded by a title such as "Officer" or by their rank.
Protected professional titles
In North America, several jurisdictions restrict the use of some professional titles to those individuals holding a valid and recognised license to practice. Individuals not authorised to use these reserved titles may be fined or jailed.  Protected titles are often reserved to those professions that require a bachelor's degree or higher and a state, provincial, or national license.
Other organizations
Some titles are used to show one's role or position in a society or organization.
Some titles are used in English to refer to the position of people in foreign political systems
Non-English speaking areas
Default titles in other languages
Rajput social titles
Titles used in Rajasthan and other neighbourhood states of India in honour of Rajputs (only):
Martial Arts
Academic
Religious
Honorary titles
Rulers
Historical titles for heads of state
The following are no longer officially in use, though some may be claimed by former regnal dynasties.
Appointed
Elected or popularly declared
Hereditary
When a difference exists below, male titles are placed to the left and female titles are placed to the right of the slash.
Historical
Russian:
German:
Spanish:
Others:
Other
Historical
Post-nominal letters
Members of legislatures often have post-nominal letters expressing this:
University degrees
See also
Notes
References
Sources