United States House Committee on Financial Services
The United States House Committee on Financial Services, also referred to as the House Banking Committee and previously known as the Committee on Banking and Currency, is the committee of the United States House of Representatives that oversees the entire financial services industry, including the securities, insurance, banking and housing industries. The Financial Services Committee also oversees the work of the Federal Reserve, the United States Department of the Treasury, the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission and other financial services regulators.
The House Committee on Financial Services is considered to be one of the House's most powerful committees.
It is currently chaired by Democrat Maxine Waters from California. Waters was elected as chair of the committee, and assumed office on January 3, 2019. The Ranking Member is Republican Patrick McHenry from North Carolina, he has served as the Ranking Member since January 3, 2019.
Jurisdiction
Under the rules of the 113th Congress, the Financial Services Committee's jurisdiction includes:
History
The Banking and Currency Committee was created on December 11, 1865, to take over responsibilities previously handled by the Ways and Means Committee. It continued to function under this name until 1968, when it assumed the current name.
Members, 117th Congress
Resolutions electing members: H.Res. 9 (Chair), H.Res. 10 (Ranking Member), H.Res. 62 (D), H.Res. 63 (R), H.Res. 511 (R), H.Res. 1159 (R)
Subcommittees
The Financial Services Committee operates with six subcommittees. The jurisdiction over insurance was transferred in 2001 to the then-House Banking and Financial Services Committee from the House Energy and Commerce Committee. Since that time it had been the purview of the Subcommittee on Capital Markets, Insurance and Government Sponsored Enterprises. But "with plans to reform Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac expected to take up much of that panel's agenda, insurance instead [was] moved to a new Subcommittee on Insurance, Housing and Community Opportunity [as of the 112th Congress]." In the 115th Congress, a new subcommittee on Terrorism and Illicit Finance was created, dedicated to disrupting the financing of terrorist organizations.
Historical membership rosters
116th Congress
Sources: H.Res. 7 (Chair), H.Res. 8 (Ranking Member), H.Res. 57 (D), H.Res. 68 (R), H.Res. 596 (R), H.Res. 801 (R)
114th Congress
Sources: H.Res. 6 (Chair), H.Res. 7 (Ranking Member), H.Res. 29 (R), H.Res. 45 (D)
112th Congress
Source: https://financialservices.house.gov/uploadedfiles/113th_congress_membership.pdf
111th Congress
Source: https://financialservices.house.gov/uploadedfiles/111thmembers.pdf