United States at the 1996 Summer Olympics
The United States were the host nation for the 1996 Summer Olympics in Atlanta, Georgia. 646 competitors, 375 men and 271 women, took part in 263 events in 31 sports.
The team finished first in the overall medal rankings for the first time since 1984, and for the first time since 1968 in a non-boycotted Summer Olympics.
Medalists
The following U.S. competitors won medals at the games. In the by discipline sections below, medalists' names are bolded. 
* - Indicates that the athlete competed in preliminaries but not the final.
Archery
The United States claimed both of the gold medals in the men's archery competitions, with Justin Huish claiming the individual medal and the three-man team claiming the team medal.  The American women were not as successful.
Athletics
Notes:* - Indicates the athlete ran in a preliminary round but not the final.
Baseball
Baseball was open only to male amateurs in 1992 and 1996. As a result, the Americans and other nations where professional baseball is developed relied on collegiate players, while Cubans used their most experienced veterans, who technically were considered amateurs as they nominally held other jobs, but in fact trained full-time. In 2000, pros were admitted, but the MLB refused to release its players in 2000, 2004, and 2008, and the situation changed only a little: the Cubans still used their best players, while the Americans started using minor leaguers. The IOC cited the absence of the best players as the main reason for baseball being dropped from the Olympic program.
Basketball
Men's tournament
Women's tournament
Canoeing
Slalom
Sprint
Key: QF - Qualified to medal final; SF - Qualified to semifinal; R - Qualified to repechage
Cycling
Road
Track
Diving
Equestrian
* - Though Matz placed high enough to qualify for the final, only three riders per nation were allowed to advance to the final.
Fencing
Fifteen fencers, nine men and six women, represented the United States in 1996.
Field hockey
Men's tournament
The US men's field hockey team competed for the sixth time at the Summer Olympics. On home soil the squad coached by Jon Clark once again finished twelfth and last.
Head Coach: Jon Clark
Women's tournament
The US women's field hockey team competed for the third time at the Summer Olympics. On home soil the team coached by Pam Hixon and finished fifth.
Head coach: Pam Hixon
Football (soccer)
Men's tournament
 United States
Head coach: Bruce Arena

Women's tournament
Head coach:  Tony DiCicco
Gymnastics
Artistic
* - Strug slightly injured her ankle during her first vault attempt in the final rotation of the team competition, then exacerbated the injury on her second attempt to dramatically clinch the gold for the United States. Due to her injury, she was unable to compete in the individual finals. This necessitated the substitution of Miller in the vault, Dawes in the floor exercise and Moceanu in the all-around.
Rhythmic
Handball
Judo
Rowing
Qualification legend: FA=Final A (medal); FB=Final B (non-medal); FC=Final C (non-medal); FD=Final D (non-medal); SA/B=Semifinal A/B; SC/D=Semifinal C/D; R=Repechage
Sailing
Shooting
Softball
Swimming
Key: * - Swimmer competed in the heat but not the final; FA - Qualify to A final (medal); FB - Qualify to B final (non-medal)
Key: * - Swimmer competed in the heat but not the final; FA - Qualify to A final (medal); FB - Qualify to B final (non-medal)
Tennis
Volleyball
Indoor
Men
Women
Water polo
Wrestling
See also
Notes