United States at the 1984 Summer Olympics
The United States was the host nation of the 1984 Summer Olympics in Los Angeles, California. It was the nineteenth time that Team USA participated, having boycotted the 1980 Summer Olympics. 522 competitors, 339 men and 183 women, took part in 217 events in 25 sports.
These Olympic Games were unique for the United States in that the host state was California, the home state of the country's president, Ronald Reagan, who himself opened the Games, becoming the first American president to open a Summer Olympics, and also any Olympic games in the United States. Reagan was governor of the state from 1967 to 1975. It was not until the 2002 Winter Olympics in Salt Lake City that an American president opened a Winter Olympics in the United States.
The United States topped the medal count for the first time since 1968, winning a record 83 gold medals and surpassing the Soviet Union’s total of 80 golds at the 1980 Summer Olympics.
Medalists
The following U.S. competitors won medals at the games. In the by discipline sections below, medalists' names are bolded. 
* - Indicates that the athlete competed in preliminaries but not the final.
Archery
The United States returned to archery competition with a dominant men's team that earned the top two spots. Their women were not as successful against the newly powerful Asian teams from Korea, China, and Japan, but still managed to place an archer in the top eight.
Athletics
Basketball
Men's Tournament
Women's Tournament
Canoeing
Key: QF - Qualified to medal final; SF - Qualified to semifinal; R - Qualified to repechage
Cycling
Twenty cyclists represented the United States in 1984.
Road
Track
Diving
Equestrian
Fencing
Twenty fencers represented the United States in 1984.
Field hockey
Men's tournament
Women's tournament
Football
Head coach:  Alketas Panagoulias
Gymnastics
Artistic
Handball
Men's Tournament
Women's Tournament
Modern pentathlon
Three male modern pentathletes represented the United States in 1984. They won the silver medal in the team event.
Rowing
United States rowing results and competitors:
Shooting
Swimming
* - Athlete swam in the heat but not the final.
Note: Times in the first round ranked across all heats.
Qualification legend: FA - Advance to medal final; FB - Advance to non-medal final
Volleyball
Men's Tournament
Women's Tournament
Water polo
Wrestling
Key: