Visa policy of Indonesia
Most visitors to Indonesia may obtain a visa on arrival to Indonesia, unless they are a citizen of one of the visa-exempt countries. However, some countries must obtain a visa in advance from one of the Indonesian diplomatic missions before being allowed to enter Indonesia. All visitors must hold a passport valid for 6 months as well as a valid return ticket. Passport with validity of more than 3 months can be accepted in special cases or business travel. The immigration officer at the port of entry may ask the passenger to produce any necessary documents (such as hotel reservation and proof of finance).
Visa exemption
Due to the COVID-19 pandemic in Indonesia, the Directorate General of Immigration published a new list of countries whose nationals are visa-exempt.
All  ASEAN nationals do not need a visa to enter Indonesia, for a maximum stay of 30 days.
Nationals of a visa-exempt country may enter Indonesia through any of the designated border crossings, comprising 15 airports, 91 seaports and 12 cross-border posts.
Visa on arrival
Due to the COVID-19 pandemic in Indonesia, the Directorate General of Immigration also published a new list of countries whose nationals are eligible to obtain a visa on arrival to Indonesia.
Nationals of the following 77 countries may apply for a visa on arrival to Indonesia. A visa obtained on arrival costs Rp500,000, and is valid for a maximum stay of 30 days, though the visa can be extended once inside Indonesia for another 30 days at designated entry points by paying another Rp500,000.
In addition, all visa-exempt  ASEAN nationals are also eligible to obtain a visa on arrival to Indonesia.
Nationals of a country eligible for a visa on arrival may obtain a visa at any of the designated border crossings, comprising 15 airports, 35 seaports and 7 cross-border posts.
Transit without a visa
Passengers transiting through Soekarno-Hatta International Airport for less than 24 hours, or other airports for less than 8 hours, do not require a visa. However, those who are switching terminals in Soekarno-Hatta, or those transiting through Ngurah Rai International Airport require a visa unless they are from a visa-exempt jurisdiction.
Approval required
Nationals who wish to obtain a multiple-entry visa, extend their visa (up to a maximum of five extensions) or who are not eligible for either visa-free entry or visa on arrival must apply for a visa in advance at an Indonesian embassy or consulate.
Nationals of the following 8 countries require prior approval from the Directorate General of Immigration in Jakarta. Besides a visa, they must hold a reference letter issued by the Directorate General of Immigration, as well as the invitation letter used to apply for their Indonesian visa before travelling to Indonesia. This policy is called the Indonesian Calling Visa.



Non-ordinary passports
Holders of diplomatic or service category passports issued by the following countries are allowed to visit Indonesia without a visa under visa waiver agreements:
Visa waiver agreements for diplomatic and service passports were signed with the following countries but not ratified yet:  Bahrain,  Ethiopia,  Equatorial Guinea,
 Micronesia,
 Niger,  Panama,
 Sweden.
APEC Business Travel Card
Holders of passports issued by the following countries who possess an APEC Business Travel Card (ABTC) containing the "IDN" code on the reverse that it is valid for travel to Indonesia can enter visa-free for business trips for up to 60 days.
ABTCs are issued to nationals of:
Reform
Visitor Statistics
Most visitors arriving to Indonesia were from the following countries of nationality: