Visa policy of New Zealand
Non–New Zealand citizens wishing to enter the Realm of New Zealand must obtain a visa unless they are


Both citizens and permanent residents of Australia are deemed to hold resident status in New Zealand upon arrival under the Trans-Tasman travel arrangement.
Visitors must hold passports that are valid for at least 3 months beyond the period of intended stay. Visitors are required to hold proof of sufficient funds to cover their stay: NZD 1,000 per person per month of stay or NZD 400 if accommodation has been prepaid. Visitors are required to hold documents required for their next destination.
New Zealand issues eVisas to nationals of visa waiver countries and China. Applications for student, work, and visitor visas can be lodged online.
Overview
Any person who is not a New Zealand citizen may only travel to New Zealand if holding a valid visa or is a person to whom a visa waiver applies.
While there are many different categories of visa, they can be fundamentally broken down into three classes:
Holding a visa, or taking advantage of a visa waiver, does not in itself entitle a person to enter New Zealand itself: it only entitles the person to travel to New Zealand and apply for entry permission.  Entry permission to New Zealand must be granted to a person for that person to be able to enter New Zealand; this is typically done by an immigration officer at the border.  Refusal of entry permission results in automatic visa cancellation, and the person being made liable for turnaround if the person has arrived at the border.  While most foreign nationals must apply for, and be granted, entry permission at the border, holders of a Permanent Resident Visa, a Resident Visa granted in New Zealand, or a Resident Visa granted outside New Zealand where the holder has previously travelled to New Zealand are granted entry permission as of right.
New Zealand issues electronic visas (an "eVisa") for all visa application types, though a physical label may be placed in a passport upon request.  Electronic visas are linked to a specific passport, and it is necessary for a visa holder to formally request a visa transfer if a new passport is obtained.
New Zealand does not stamp passports of New Zealand citizens, residence class visa holders, or Australian citizens and permanent residents.  Holders of a temporary entry class visa, or visa waiver travellers seeking a Visitor Visa on arrival may receive passport stamps if they enter through a staffed immigration counter instead of the automated eGates; however, Immigration New Zealand and the New Zealand Customs Service are investigating the possibility of removing passport stamps entirely.
Australian citizens and permanent residents
By virtue of the Trans-Tasman Travel Arrangement, Australian citizens and permanent residents are granted a Resident Visa on arrival if they are of good character.  This Resident Visa expires when the holder leaves New Zealand; a variation of travel conditions may be sought if the holder later intends to re-enter New Zealand on that same visa.  This then allows the holder's residence in New Zealand to be considered continuous, which is an important factor if the holder intends to later apply for a Permanent Resident Visa or the grant of New Zealand citizenship.
Effects of the COVID-19 pandemic
Due to the COVID-19 pandemic New Zealand's government has implemented a series of measures regarding entry into New Zealand.  
COVID-19 Vaccination Requirements
Anyone above the age of 16 must be fully vaccinated to enter New Zealand.
Proof of vaccination via a digital vaccine certificate or paper document from a government health authority must be submitted online before arrival. 
The vaccine requirement does not apply to:
Testing & Quarantine Measures
Pre-departure COVID-19 testing is no longer required for passengers entering New Zealand. No quarantine measures apply to arrivals.
All passengers must complete a New Zealand Traveller Declaration before arrival and submit their proof of vaccination if required. Boarding will be refused if no declaration has been completed.
All passengers entering New Zealand receive rapid antigen tests (RATs) that must be taken on day 0/1 of arrival and a second test on day 5/6. All results, positive or negative must be submitted online. In the case of a positive test arrivals must self-isolate for seven days and get a follow up PCR test.
Visa waiver travellers
As of 1 October 2019, a visa waiver applies to, but is not limited to, the following people:

New Zealand Electronic Travel Authority

Since 1 October 2019, travellers that are visa waiver must request a New Zealand Electronic Travel Authority (NZeTA) prior to travel.


The NZeTA is mandatory for all sea and air arrivals, including transit, unless exempt. When issued, it remains valid for the period of two years.


NZeTA is priced at NZD 9 or NZD 12 depending on whether the applicant applies through a mobile app or online.


The New Zealand government expects the NZeTA to cause visitor numbers to drop and reduce visitor spending by NZD 51 million.

The following visa waiver travellers are exempt from the requirement to hold a NZeTA before travelling to New Zealand:
International Visitor Conservation and Tourism Levy

Many tourists, people on working holidays, and some students and workers coming to New Zealand must pay an International Visitor Conservation and Tourism Levy (IVL) of NZD $35.  This fee is payable at the time of applying for a visa or requesting an NZeTA.
Additionally, exemptions exist for transit passengers arriving at and leaving from Auckland International Airport, holders of a Business Visitor Visa, and holders of an APEC Business Travel Card.  Applicants for specific visas also do not need to pay the IVL.
Unacceptable travel documents
Any travel document issued by the countries or sources listed below are unacceptable for travel to New Zealand, and visas will not be endorsed in them:
APEC Business Travel Card
Holders of passports issued by the following countries who possess an APEC Business Travel Card (ABTC) with the "NZL" code on the reverse that denotes it is valid for travel to New Zealand can enter visa-free for business trips for up to 90 days.
ABTCs are issued to nationals of:
Transit
A person intending to travel and be in New Zealand as a transit passenger must apply for and obtain a Transit Visa before proceeding to New Zealand, unless this requirement is waived.
Transit facilities are only available at Auckland Airport, and transit passengers must remain in the transit area for the entire period of time in New Zealand and for not longer than 24 hours.  Transit passengers not passing through Auckland Airport, or who must leave the transit area of Auckland Airport, or who will remain in the transit area of Auckland Airport for longer than 24 hours are ineligible to enter New Zealand as a transit passenger and will need to obtain a Visitor Visa if they are not a visa waiver traveller.
Transit visa waiver travellers
As of 20 June 2020, a transit visa waiver applies to, but is not limited to, the following people:
Associated states and dependent territories
The associated states of the Cook Islands and Niue, and the dependent territory of Tokelau, have visa policies separate to that of New Zealand.
Cook Islands
All visitors to the Cook Islands, irrespective of nationality, are visa-exempt for a maximum stay of 31 days. Visitors travelling for tourist purposes may extend their stay, for periods of 31 days, up to a maximum of 6 months.
Niue
Visas are required for all visitors to Niue, except for nationals of New Zealand who are Niueans or descendants of Niueans and nationals of other countries who are bona fide visitors staying 30 days or less. Visitors must have sufficient funds for the length of their stay together with a confirmed reservation for accommodation and those not holding return or onward tickets could be refused entry. Extensions of stay are possible.
Tokelau
All visitors must obtain a permit to enter Tokelau from the Tokelau Apia Liaison Office in Apia, at least 2 weeks prior to travel. Tokelau can only be reached by boat from Samoa and a permit from the Samoan Immigration Authorities is required to leave and re-enter Samoa.
Statistics
New Zealand issued 262,033 general visitor visas in the 2016/17 fiscal year. Top nationalities were:
Most visitors came from the following countries of residence:
History
Before 1881
In the early years New Zealand was seen by Europeans as the most remote country on earth. For most Europeans New Zealand was an unappealing prospect, a strange and lonely land reached after 100 days on dangerous seas; its coasts were thought treacherous, its inhabitants bloodthirsty. Only exceptional reasons led people to set off for such a distant corner of the globe. Many of New Zealand's early immigrants first spent time in Australia, and most of them were only temporary visitors in search of items to trade.
Among the earliest visitors were sealers, attracted by the promise of high-quality oil, and fur for hats (often sold in China in return for tea). As early as 1792, whalers came to the northern end of the country, also as temporary visitors. Also missionaries arrived in New Zealand. By 1839 the total non-Māori population was about 2,000.
Until 1839 there were only about 2,000 immigrants in New Zealand; by 1852 there were about 28,000. The decisive moment for this remarkable change was 1840. In that year, the Treaty of Waitangi was signed. This established British authority in European eyes, and gave British immigrants legal rights as citizens. Most of the people who moved to New Zealand Company settlements were British.
From 1853 to 1870 the non-Māori population of New Zealand rose from just under 30,000 to over 250,000. As with the inflow of the 1840s, there were three main groups – assisted families coming directly from Britain; individuals from across the Tasman Sea looking for a better life; and military settlers.
1881–1914
Restrictions on immigration were first imposed in 1881. Until then, anyone who arrived in New Zealand had been able to remain in the country.
The Chinese Immigrants Act 1881 was the first to restrict the entry of a specific group of people. The number of Chinese who could arrive on one ship was limited to one for every 10 tons of the vessel's weight. A poll tax of £10 was also imposed on each Chinese person entering the country. Unlike the Chinese, most Indians were British subjects and free to enter New Zealand until the very end of the 19th century. From 1896, despite objections from the British government, New Zealand tried to pass more comprehensive legislation restricting the immigration not just of the Chinese but also of Indians and other Asians.
The 1899 act prohibited the entry of immigrants who were not of British or Irish parentage and who could not fill in an application form 'in any European language' – which in practice meant English. These rules were in place for the next 20 years. The fear of economic competition was one reason why the entry of Chinese, Indians and other 'race aliens' was restricted.
1914–1945
Under the War Regulations of 1916, during the First World War, no person over the age of 15 could land in New Zealand without a passport or other document establishing his or her nationality or identity.
Under the Undesirable Immigrants Exclusion Act 1919, Germans and Austro-Hungarians were prohibited from entering without a licence issued by the attorney general. The act also gave power to the attorney general to prohibit the entry of any person not resident in New Zealand – including British subjects – who was disaffected or disloyal, or of such a character that his presence would be injurious to the peace, order and good government' of New Zealand.
The Immigration Restriction Amendment Act 1920 was passed primarily to restrict possible Asian immigration, but Asians were not its only targets. It was also used to curb the entry of other non-British people, particularly Southern Europeans such as Dalmatians and Italians.
The 1931 Immigration Restriction Amendment Act, passed during the Depression period of the 1930s, prevented aliens (as non-British immigrants were still known) from Europe entering New Zealand. The only exceptions were if they had guaranteed employment, a considerable amount of capital, or knowledge and skills.
1945-1987
From 1961 only Australians had unrestricted entry to New Zealand. This was a long-standing right, established in 1840 when New Zealand became a British colony like Australia. Reciprocal travel arrangements, beginning in the 1920s, formalised this free movement from one country to the other. In 1973, the Trans-Tasman Travel Arrangement allowed Australian and New Zealand citizens to enter each other's countries to visit, live, work, or remain indefinitely without having to apply for a permit.
Under the 1961 Immigration Amendment Act, British and Irish immigrants, along with other non-New Zealand citizens (except Australians, who could enter freely) were required to have a permit before entering New Zealand. In practice, the permit was only a formality for Britons and Irish; they were issued with permits on arrival. Nevertheless, for the first time, the 1961 act put British and non-British people on the same footing when they sought to enter New Zealand. After the immigration policy review of 1974, British migrants, like all others, were required to obtain a permit before they left their homelands. The British and Irish were now on the same footing as the nationals of other countries.
Between the 1940s and the 1970s, New Zealand concluded visa-free agreements with countries of Western Europe.
1987-2019
On 1 November 1987, the Immigration Act 1987 came into force which changed the selection process for immigrants to one of merit, finalising a shift that had begun in the 1960s away from the emphasis at the time on nationality and ethnic origin as the basis for determining which immigrants were to be admitted.  Immigrants were now selected in three categories: skills and business, family and humanitarian.  The skills and business stream was originally based on an occupational priority list, but was replaced with a points system in 1991.  The changes led to an increase in migration from non-traditional source countries (in particular from Asian countries), as it was now easier for these people to migrate to New Zealand.
Immigration legislation was later overhauled by the Immigration Act 2009, which came into effect on 29 November 2010.  It modernised the earlier 1987 legislation, but did not make major changes to the criteria under which immigrants would apply to travel to and stay in New Zealand.
From 1987, visa-free access was provided to more countries, most notably Eastern European countries as they became members of the European Union.  At the same time, illegal immigration saw the visa-free access of many Pacific and African nations being revoked.  The most recent amendment was made on 17 October 2016, which granted visa-free access for citizens of Mauritius and Seychelles, and revoked visa-free access for citizens of South Africa.