Visa policy of Cambodia
Visitors to Cambodia must obtain a visa unless they are a citizen of one of the visa-exempt countries. All visitors must hold a passport that is valid for at least six months and contains at least one empty page.
Visa exemption
Holders of normal passports of the following 10 countries do not require a visa for Cambodia for up to 30 days (unless otherwise noted):
Holders of diplomatic and official/service passports of Belarus, Brazil, Brunei, Bulgaria, China, Cuba, Ecuador, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Iran, Japan, Laos, Malaysia, Mongolia, Myanmar, Peru, Philippines, Russia, Serbia,  Seychelles, Singapore, Slovakia, South Korea, Thailand, Uruguay and Vietnam do not require a visa for Cambodia.
In July 2015 tourism industry representatives proposed a wider visa-free regime as a response to similar moves by neighbouring countries.
Visa on arrival
Visitors to Cambodia can obtain a visa on arrival for tourism (US$30) or business purposes (US$35), for a maximum stay of 30 days. Extensions are possible.
eVisa
Nationals of any country other than Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Pakistan and Syria may apply for an eVisa online for US$36 before arrival. It allows a single entry and a maximum stay of 30 days for tourism purposes.
Holders of eVisas may enter via the following entry points:
Transit
Transit passengers who are leaving on the same arrival aircraft do not need a visa when transiting through Phnom Penh International Airport.
Entry requirements
Day trips (arriving and departing on the same day) are not permitted except when arriving and departing via Phnom Penh International Airport. Return/onward ticket is required for nationals of Afghanistan, Algeria, Bangladesh, Iran, Iraq, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, Sri Lanka and Sudan.
COVID-19 pandemic
During the COVID-19 pandemic, entry was not allowed for persons who had previously visited or who are originating from France, Germany, Italy, Spain or the United States.
Statistics
Most visitors arriving to Cambodia on short-term basis were from the following countries of nationality:
See also
References
Sources