Yusof Ishak
Yusof bin Ishak DUT DK SMN (12 August 1910 – 23 November 1970) was a Singaporean politician and journalist who served as the first president of Singapore from 1965 until his death in 1970. 


Prior to becoming head of state, Yusof was a well-known journalist who co-founded Utusan Melayu, a daily newspaper that was in circulation until 9 October 2019. He started journalism after graduating from Raffles Institution in 1929, and joined Warta Malaya, a well-known Malay newspaper company, in 1932. He left the company in 1938 and co-founded Utusan Melayu.
Yusof held many appointments within the Singapore Government. He served on the Film Appeal Committee between 1948 and 1950, and was a member of both the Nature Reserves Committee and Malayanisation Commission for a year. In July 1959, he was appointed Chairman of the Public Service Commission (PSC). He was sworn in on 3 December that year as Yang di-Pertuan Negara of Singapore after the People's Action Party (PAP) won the first election to be held after Singapore's move to self-governance. Yusof later became the first president of Singapore after the country gained independence on 9 August 1965.
After serving three terms in office, Yusof died on 23 November 1970 due to heart failure. His portrait appears on the Singapore Portrait Series currency notes introduced in 1999.
Early life
Born on 12 August 1910 in Kampung Padang Gajah, Terong, Taiping, Perak Darul Ridzuan, which was then part of the Federated Malay States (now Malaysia), Yusof was the eldest son in the family of nine. He was of Minangkabau descent from his paternal side while his mother was a Malay from the Langkat region in Indonesia. His father, Ishak bin Ahmad, was a civil servant and held the post of Acting Director of Fisheries, Straits Settlements and Federated Malay States. His brother, Aziz Ishak, was a Malayan journalist and freedom fighter.
Yusof received his early education in a Malay school located in Kuala Kurau, Perak and began his English studies in 1921 at King Edward VII School in Taiping. He attended Victoria Bridge School in 1923 when his father was posted to Singapore. 
In 1924, he enrolled into Raffles Institution for his secondary education. During his time in Raffles Institution, he played various sports such as swimming, weight lifting, water polo, boxing, hockey and cricket, and had also represented the school in various sporting events. 
He was also part of the National Cadet Corps and was commissioned as the first ever cadet officer in the Corps due to his outstanding performance. Yusof received his Cambridge School Certificate with distinction in 1927 and was awarded the Queen's Scholarship but decided to prolong his studies at Raffles Institution until 1929.
Career
After graduating from Raffles Institution in 1929, Yusof started his career as a journalist and went into partnership with two other friends to publish, Sportsman, a sports magazine devoted entirely to sports. In 1932, Yusof joined Warta Malaya, a well-known newspaper during that time. Warta Malaya was heavily influenced by developments in the Middle East and Yusof wanted a newspaper dedicated to Malay issues. He fulfilled his vision by establishing Utusan Melayu with several Malay leaders in Singapore in May 1939.
During the Japanese occupation of Singapore, Utusan Melayu had to stop circulation as machinery used to print the paper were requisitioned to publish the Japanese paper, Berita Malai. Yusof then moved back to Taiping and with the remaining money he had, he opened a provision shop and lived there until the war ended in 1945 and Utusan Melayu resumed publication. In 1957, Yusof moved to Kuala Lumpur and in February 1958, the headquarters of Utusan Melayu was also relocated to the city. 
During the post-war period, many Malays wanted independence of Malaya from the British and Yusof, fanned this fervour through his publications which resulted in the formation of the United Malay National Organisation (UMNO) in 1946. However, his democratic ideals were different from UMNO's vision of re-establishing the monarchy of Malaya. This resulted in rising tensions within the Utusan Melayu and in 1959, Yusof had sold his shares he had in the company and resigned as UMNO had bought over almost all of the shares of Utusan Melayu.
Presidency
Yusof held several appointments within the Singapore Government and had served on the Film Appeal Committee between 1948 and 1950 and was also a member of both the Nature Reserves Committee and Malayanisation Commission for a year. After his resignation from  Utusan Melayu, Yusof took the position of Chairman of the Public Service Commission (PSC) at the invitation of Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew.
After People's Action Party's victory from the 1959 general election, Yusof was appointed Yang di-Pertuan Negara and was sworn on 3 December 1959. During his time as Yang di-Pertuan Negara, Singapore was divided by racial conflicts. Yusof actively promoted multiculturalism and reached out to people of all races to help restore trust and confidence after the 1964 racial riots.
On 9 August 1965, Singapore was expelled from Malaysia and became an independent nation. The position of Yang di-Pertuan Negara was abolished and Yusof then became the first President of Singapore. As president, Yusof reached out to the people to reassure citizens astonished by Singapore's expulsion and continued to promote multiculturalism and a national identity within the country by visiting constituencies and reached out to different racial and religious groups.
Yusof served for three terms in office before he died on 23 November 1970 due to heart failure.
Personal life
Yusof is survived by his wife of 21 years, Puan Noor Aishah, and their three children, Orkid Kamariah, Imran, and Zuriana. Puan Noor Aishah continued her husband's legacy of public service and was the first Asian to become president of the Singapore Girl Guides Association. She and her now adult children were interviewed for the Channel NewsAsia documentary Daughters of Singapore, which screened in August 2015 as part of the SG50 celebrations and commemorated the spouses of Yusof Ishak and David Marshall, two pioneer leaders of Singapore.
Yusof participated in several sports in his youth. He won the Aw Boon Par Cup for boxing in 1932, and was the national lightweight champion in weightlifting in 1933. One of Yusof's hobbies was photography, and a collection of his photographs was donated to the National Archives of Singapore by his widow, Noor Aishah. He also cultivated orchids, and had the tennis courts at his residence on the Istana grounds, Sri Melati, converted into an orchid garden. He performed the pilgrimage to Mecca in 1963.
Legacy
The following institutions bear Yusof Ishak's name:
Other memorials include:
Honours
Honours of Singapore
Foreign Honours